The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Life and Adventures of Robinson Crusoe,
by Daniel Defoe


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: The Life and Adventures of Robinson Crusoe


Author: Daniel Defoe



Release Date: April 6, 2010  [eBook #521]
Originally released: February 28, 1996
Last Updated: November 16, 2016

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LIFE AND ADVENTURES OF
ROBINSON CRUSOE***


Transcribed from the 1919 Seeley, Service & Co. edition by David Price,
email ccx074@pglaf.org





                                   The
                           Life and Adventures
                                    of
                             Robinson Crusoe


                                    By
                               Daniel Defoe

                                * * * * *

                   _With Illustrations by H. M. Brock_

                                * * * * *

                                  London
                      Seeley, Service & Co. Limited
                         38 Great Russell Street




CHAPTER I--START IN LIFE


I was born in the year 1632, in the city of York, of a good family,
though not of that country, my father being a foreigner of Bremen, who
settled first at Hull.  He got a good estate by merchandise, and leaving
off his trade, lived afterwards at York, from whence he had married my
mother, whose relations were named Robinson, a very good family in that
country, and from whom I was called Robinson Kreutznaer; but, by the
usual corruption of words in England, we are now called--nay we call
ourselves and write our name--Crusoe; and so my companions always called
me.

I had two elder brothers, one of whom was lieutenant-colonel to an
English regiment of foot in Flanders, formerly commanded by the famous
Colonel Lockhart, and was killed at the battle near Dunkirk against the
Spaniards.  What became of my second brother I never knew, any more than
my father or mother knew what became of me.

Being the third son of the family and not bred to any trade, my head
began to be filled very early with rambling thoughts.  My father, who was
very ancient, had given me a competent share of learning, as far as
house-education and a country free school generally go, and designed me
for the law; but I would be satisfied with nothing but going to sea; and
my inclination to this led me so strongly against the will, nay, the
commands of my father, and against all the entreaties and persuasions of
my mother and other friends, that there seemed to be something fatal in
that propensity of nature, tending directly to the life of misery which
was to befall me.

My father, a wise and grave man, gave me serious and excellent counsel
against what he foresaw was my design.  He called me one morning into his
chamber, where he was confined by the gout, and expostulated very warmly
with me upon this subject.  He asked me what reasons, more than a mere
wandering inclination, I had for leaving father's house and my native
country, where I might be well introduced, and had a prospect of raising
my fortune by application and industry, with a life of ease and pleasure.
He told me it was men of desperate fortunes on one hand, or of aspiring,
superior fortunes on the other, who went abroad upon adventures, to rise
by enterprise, and make themselves famous in undertakings of a nature out
of the common road; that these things were all either too far above me or
too far below me; that mine was the middle state, or what might be called
the upper station of low life, which he had found, by long experience,
was the best state in the world, the most suited to human happiness, not
exposed to the miseries and hardships, the labour and sufferings of the
mechanic part of mankind, and not embarrassed with the pride, luxury,
ambition, and envy of the upper part of mankind.  He told me I might
judge of the happiness of this state by this one thing--viz. that this
was the state of life which all other people envied; that kings have
frequently lamented the miserable consequence of being born to great
things, and wished they had been placed in the middle of the two
extremes, between the mean and the great; that the wise man gave his
testimony to this, as the standard of felicity, when he prayed to have
neither poverty nor riches.

He bade me observe it, and I should always find that the calamities of
life were shared among the upper and lower part of mankind, but that the
middle station had the fewest disasters, and was not exposed to so many
vicissitudes as the higher or lower part of mankind; nay, they were not
subjected to so many distempers and uneasinesses, either of body or mind,
as those were who, by vicious living, luxury, and extravagances on the
one hand, or by hard labour, want of necessaries, and mean or
insufficient diet on the other hand, bring distemper upon themselves by
the natural consequences of their way of living; that the middle station
of life was calculated for all kind of virtue and all kind of enjoyments;
that peace and plenty were the handmaids of a middle fortune; that
temperance, moderation, quietness, health, society, all agreeable
diversions, and all desirable pleasures, were the blessings attending the
middle station of life; that this way men went silently and smoothly
through the world, and comfortably out of it, not embarrassed with the
labours of the hands or of the head, not sold to a life of slavery for
daily bread, nor harassed with perplexed circumstances, which rob the
soul of peace and the body of rest, nor enraged with the passion of envy,
or the secret burning lust of ambition for great things; but, in easy
circumstances, sliding gently through the world, and sensibly tasting the
sweets of living, without the bitter; feeling that they are happy, and
learning by every day's experience to know it more sensibly.

After this he pressed me earnestly, and in the most affectionate manner,
not to play the young man, nor to precipitate myself into miseries which
nature, and the station of life I was born in, seemed to have provided
against; that I was under no necessity of seeking my bread; that he would
do well for me, and endeavour to enter me fairly into the station of life
which he had just been recommending to me; and that if I was not very
easy and happy in the world, it must be my mere fate or fault that must
hinder it; and that he should have nothing to answer for, having thus
discharged his duty in warning me against measures which he knew would be
to my hurt; in a word, that as he would do very kind things for me if I
would stay and settle at home as he directed, so he would not have so
much hand in my misfortunes as to give me any encouragement to go away;
and to close all, he told me I had my elder brother for an example, to
whom he had used the same earnest persuasions to keep him from going into
the Low Country wars, but could not prevail, his young desires prompting
him to run into the army, where he was killed; and though he said he
would not cease to pray for me, yet he would venture to say to me, that
if I did take this foolish step, God would not bless me, and I should
have leisure hereafter to reflect upon having neglected his counsel when
there might be none to assist in my recovery.

I observed in this last part of his discourse, which was truly prophetic,
though I suppose my father did not know it to be so himself--I say, I
observed the tears run down his face very plentifully, especially when he
spoke of my brother who was killed: and that when he spoke of my having
leisure to repent, and none to assist me, he was so moved that he broke
off the discourse, and told me his heart was so full he could say no more
to me.

I was sincerely affected with this discourse, and, indeed, who could be
otherwise? and I resolved not to think of going abroad any more, but to
settle at home according to my father's desire.  But alas! a few days
wore it all off; and, in short, to prevent any of my father's further
importunities, in a few weeks after I resolved to run quite away from
him.  However, I did not act quite so hastily as the first heat of my
resolution prompted; but I took my mother at a time when I thought her a
little more pleasant than ordinary, and told her that my thoughts were so
entirely bent upon seeing the world that I should never settle to
anything with resolution enough to go through with it, and my father had
better give me his consent than force me to go without it; that I was now
eighteen years old, which was too late to go apprentice to a trade or
clerk to an attorney; that I was sure if I did I should never serve out
my time, but I should certainly run away from my master before my time
was out, and go to sea; and if she would speak to my father to let me go
one voyage abroad, if I came home again, and did not like it, I would go
no more; and I would promise, by a double diligence, to recover the time
that I had lost.

This put my mother into a great passion; she told me she knew it would be
to no purpose to speak to my father upon any such subject; that he knew
too well what was my interest to give his consent to anything so much for
my hurt; and that she wondered how I could think of any such thing after
the discourse I had had with my father, and such kind and tender
expressions as she knew my father had used to me; and that, in short, if
I would ruin myself, there was no help for me; but I might depend I
should never have their consent to it; that for her part she would not
have so much hand in my destruction; and I should never have it to say
that my mother was willing when my father was not.

Though my mother refused to move it to my father, yet I heard afterwards
that she reported all the discourse to him, and that my father, after
showing a great concern at it, said to her, with a sigh, "That boy might
be happy if he would stay at home; but if he goes abroad, he will be the
most miserable wretch that ever was born: I can give no consent to it."

It was not till almost a year after this that I broke loose, though, in
the meantime, I continued obstinately deaf to all proposals of settling
to business, and frequently expostulated with my father and mother about
their being so positively determined against what they knew my
inclinations prompted me to.  But being one day at Hull, where I went
casually, and without any purpose of making an elopement at that time;
but, I say, being there, and one of my companions being about to sail to
London in his father's ship, and prompting me to go with them with the
common allurement of seafaring men, that it should cost me nothing for my
passage, I consulted neither father nor mother any more, nor so much as
sent them word of it; but leaving them to hear of it as they might,
without asking God's blessing or my father's, without any consideration
of circumstances or consequences, and in an ill hour, God knows, on the
1st of September 1651, I went on board a ship bound for London.  Never
any young adventurer's misfortunes, I believe, began sooner, or continued
longer than mine.  The ship was no sooner out of the Humber than the wind
began to blow and the sea to rise in a most frightful manner; and, as I
had never been at sea before, I was most inexpressibly sick in body and
terrified in mind.  I began now seriously to reflect upon what I had
done, and how justly I was overtaken by the judgment of Heaven for my
wicked leaving my father's house, and abandoning my duty.  All the good
counsels of my parents, my father's tears and my mother's entreaties,
came now fresh into my mind; and my conscience, which was not yet come to
the pitch of hardness to which it has since, reproached me with the
contempt of advice, and the breach of my duty to God and my father.

All this while the storm increased, and the sea went very high, though
nothing like what I have seen many times since; no, nor what I saw a few
days after; but it was enough to affect me then, who was but a young
sailor, and had never known anything of the matter.  I expected every
wave would have swallowed us up, and that every time the ship fell down,
as I thought it did, in the trough or hollow of the sea, we should never
rise more; in this agony of mind, I made many vows and resolutions that
if it would please God to spare my life in this one voyage, if ever I got
once my foot upon dry land again, I would go directly home to my father,
and never set it into a ship again while I lived; that I would take his
advice, and never run myself into such miseries as these any more.  Now I
saw plainly the goodness of his observations about the middle station of
life, how easy, how comfortably he had lived all his days, and never had
been exposed to tempests at sea or troubles on shore; and I resolved that
I would, like a true repenting prodigal, go home to my father.

These wise and sober thoughts continued all the while the storm lasted,
and indeed some time after; but the next day the wind was abated, and the
sea calmer, and I began to be a little inured to it; however, I was very
grave for all that day, being also a little sea-sick still; but towards
night the weather cleared up, the wind was quite over, and a charming
fine evening followed; the sun went down perfectly clear, and rose so the
next morning; and having little or no wind, and a smooth sea, the sun
shining upon it, the sight was, as I thought, the most delightful that
ever I saw.

I had slept well in the night, and was now no more sea-sick, but very
cheerful, looking with wonder upon the sea that was so rough and terrible
the day before, and could be so calm and so pleasant in so little a time
after.  And now, lest my good resolutions should continue, my companion,
who had enticed me away, comes to me; "Well, Bob," says he, clapping me
upon the shoulder, "how do you do after it?  I warrant you were frighted,
wer'n't you, last night, when it blew but a capful of wind?"  "A capful
d'you call it?" said I; "'twas a terrible storm."  "A storm, you fool
you," replies he; "do you call that a storm? why, it was nothing at all;
give us but a good ship and sea-room, and we think nothing of such a
squall of wind as that; but you're but a fresh-water sailor, Bob.  Come,
let us make a bowl of punch, and we'll forget all that; d'ye see what
charming weather 'tis now?"  To make short this sad part of my story, we
went the way of all sailors; the punch was made and I was made half drunk
with it: and in that one night's wickedness I drowned all my repentance,
all my reflections upon my past conduct, all my resolutions for the
future.  In a word, as the sea was returned to its smoothness of surface
and settled calmness by the abatement of that storm, so the hurry of my
thoughts being over, my fears and apprehensions of being swallowed up by
the sea being forgotten, and the current of my former desires returned, I
entirely forgot the vows and promises that I made in my distress.  I
found, indeed, some intervals of reflection; and the serious thoughts
did, as it were, endeavour to return again sometimes; but I shook them
off, and roused myself from them as it were from a distemper, and
applying myself to drinking and company, soon mastered the return of
those fits--for so I called them; and I had in five or six days got as
complete a victory over conscience as any young fellow that resolved not
to be troubled with it could desire.  But I was to have another trial for
it still; and Providence, as in such cases generally it does, resolved to
leave me entirely without excuse; for if I would not take this for a
deliverance, the next was to be such a one as the worst and most hardened
wretch among us would confess both the danger and the mercy of.

The sixth day of our being at sea we came into Yarmouth Roads; the wind
having been contrary and the weather calm, we had made but little way
since the storm.  Here we were obliged to come to an anchor, and here we
lay, the wind continuing contrary--viz. at south-west--for seven or eight
days, during which time a great many ships from Newcastle came into the
same Roads, as the common harbour where the ships might wait for a wind
for the river.

We had not, however, rid here so long but we should have tided it up the
river, but that the wind blew too fresh, and after we had lain four or
five days, blew very hard.  However, the Roads being reckoned as good as
a harbour, the anchorage good, and our ground-tackle very strong, our men
were unconcerned, and not in the least apprehensive of danger, but spent
the time in rest and mirth, after the manner of the sea; but the eighth
day, in the morning, the wind increased, and we had all hands at work to
strike our topmasts, and make everything snug and close, that the ship
might ride as easy as possible.  By noon the sea went very high indeed,
and our ship rode forecastle in, shipped several seas, and we thought
once or twice our anchor had come home; upon which our master ordered out
the sheet-anchor, so that we rode with two anchors ahead, and the cables
veered out to the bitter end.

By this time it blew a terrible storm indeed; and now I began to see
terror and amazement in the faces even of the seamen themselves.  The
master, though vigilant in the business of preserving the ship, yet as he
went in and out of his cabin by me, I could hear him softly to himself
say, several times, "Lord be merciful to us! we shall be all lost! we
shall be all undone!" and the like.  During these first hurries I was
stupid, lying still in my cabin, which was in the steerage, and cannot
describe my temper: I could ill resume the first penitence which I had so
apparently trampled upon and hardened myself against: I thought the
bitterness of death had been past, and that this would be nothing like
the first; but when the master himself came by me, as I said just now,
and said we should be all lost, I was dreadfully frighted.  I got up out
of my cabin and looked out; but such a dismal sight I never saw: the sea
ran mountains high, and broke upon us every three or four minutes; when I
could look about, I could see nothing but distress round us; two ships
that rode near us, we found, had cut their masts by the board, being deep
laden; and our men cried out that a ship which rode about a mile ahead of
us was foundered.  Two more ships, being driven from their anchors, were
run out of the Roads to sea, at all adventures, and that with not a mast
standing.  The light ships fared the best, as not so much labouring in
the sea; but two or three of them drove, and came close by us, running
away with only their spritsail out before the wind.

Towards evening the mate and boatswain begged the master of our ship to
let them cut away the fore-mast, which he was very unwilling to do; but
the boatswain protesting to him that if he did not the ship would
founder, he consented; and when they had cut away the fore-mast, the
main-mast stood so loose, and shook the ship so much, they were obliged
to cut that away also, and make a clear deck.

Any one may judge what a condition I must be in at all this, who was but
a young sailor, and who had been in such a fright before at but a little.
But if I can express at this distance the thoughts I had about me at that
time, I was in tenfold more horror of mind upon account of my former
convictions, and the having returned from them to the resolutions I had
wickedly taken at first, than I was at death itself; and these, added to
the terror of the storm, put me into such a condition that I can by no
words describe it.  But the worst was not come yet; the storm continued
with such fury that the seamen themselves acknowledged they had never
seen a worse.  We had a good ship, but she was deep laden, and wallowed
in the sea, so that the seamen every now and then cried out she would
founder.  It was my advantage in one respect, that I did not know what
they meant by _founder_ till I inquired.  However, the storm was so
violent that I saw, what is not often seen, the master, the boatswain,
and some others more sensible than the rest, at their prayers, and
expecting every moment when the ship would go to the bottom.  In the
middle of the night, and under all the rest of our distresses, one of the
men that had been down to see cried out we had sprung a leak; another
said there was four feet water in the hold.  Then all hands were called
to the pump.  At that word, my heart, as I thought, died within me: and I
fell backwards upon the side of my bed where I sat, into the cabin.
However, the men roused me, and told me that I, that was able to do
nothing before, was as well able to pump as another; at which I stirred
up and went to the pump, and worked very heartily.  While this was doing
the master, seeing some light colliers, who, not able to ride out the
storm were obliged to slip and run away to sea, and would come near us,
ordered to fire a gun as a signal of distress.  I, who knew nothing what
they meant, thought the ship had broken, or some dreadful thing happened.
In a word, I was so surprised that I fell down in a swoon.  As this was a
time when everybody had his own life to think of, nobody minded me, or
what was become of me; but another man stepped up to the pump, and
thrusting me aside with his foot, let me lie, thinking I had been dead;
and it was a great while before I came to myself.

We worked on; but the water increasing in the hold, it was apparent that
the ship would founder; and though the storm began to abate a little, yet
it was not possible she could swim till we might run into any port; so
the master continued firing guns for help; and a light ship, who had rid
it out just ahead of us, ventured a boat out to help us.  It was with the
utmost hazard the boat came near us; but it was impossible for us to get
on board, or for the boat to lie near the ship's side, till at last the
men rowing very heartily, and venturing their lives to save ours, our men
cast them a rope over the stern with a buoy to it, and then veered it out
a great length, which they, after much labour and hazard, took hold of,
and we hauled them close under our stern, and got all into their boat.
It was to no purpose for them or us, after we were in the boat, to think
of reaching their own ship; so all agreed to let her drive, and only to
pull her in towards shore as much as we could; and our master promised
them, that if the boat was staved upon shore, he would make it good to
their master: so partly rowing and partly driving, our boat went away to
the northward, sloping towards the shore almost as far as Winterton Ness.

We were not much more than a quarter of an hour out of our ship till we
saw her sink, and then I understood for the first time what was meant by
a ship foundering in the sea.  I must acknowledge I had hardly eyes to
look up when the seamen told me she was sinking; for from the moment that
they rather put me into the boat than that I might be said to go in, my
heart was, as it were, dead within me, partly with fright, partly with
horror of mind, and the thoughts of what was yet before me.

While we were in this condition--the men yet labouring at the oar to
bring the boat near the shore--we could see (when, our boat mounting the
waves, we were able to see the shore) a great many people running along
the strand to assist us when we should come near; but we made but slow
way towards the shore; nor were we able to reach the shore till, being
past the lighthouse at Winterton, the shore falls off to the westward
towards Cromer, and so the land broke off a little the violence of the
wind.  Here we got in, and though not without much difficulty, got all
safe on shore, and walked afterwards on foot to Yarmouth, where, as
unfortunate men, we were used with great humanity, as well by the
magistrates of the town, who assigned us good quarters, as by particular
merchants and owners of ships, and had money given us sufficient to carry
us either to London or back to Hull as we thought fit.

Had I now had the sense to have gone back to Hull, and have gone home, I
had been happy, and my father, as in our blessed Saviour's parable, had
even killed the fatted calf for me; for hearing the ship I went away in
was cast away in Yarmouth Roads, it was a great while before he had any
assurances that I was not drowned.

But my ill fate pushed me on now with an obstinacy that nothing could
resist; and though I had several times loud calls from my reason and my
more composed judgment to go home, yet I had no power to do it.  I know
not what to call this, nor will I urge that it is a secret overruling
decree, that hurries us on to be the instruments of our own destruction,
even though it be before us, and that we rush upon it with our eyes open.
Certainly, nothing but some such decreed unavoidable misery, which it was
impossible for me to escape, could have pushed me forward against the
calm reasonings and persuasions of my most retired thoughts, and against
two such visible instructions as I had met with in my first attempt.

My comrade, who had helped to harden me before, and who was the master's
son, was now less forward than I.  The first time he spoke to me after we
were at Yarmouth, which was not till two or three days, for we were
separated in the town to several quarters; I say, the first time he saw
me, it appeared his tone was altered; and, looking very melancholy, and
shaking his head, he asked me how I did, and telling his father who I
was, and how I had come this voyage only for a trial, in order to go
further abroad, his father, turning to me with a very grave and concerned
tone "Young man," says he, "you ought never to go to sea any more; you
ought to take this for a plain and visible token that you are not to be a
seafaring man."  "Why, sir," said I, "will you go to sea no more?"  "That
is another case," said he; "it is my calling, and therefore my duty; but
as you made this voyage on trial, you see what a taste Heaven has given
you of what you are to expect if you persist.  Perhaps this has all
befallen us on your account, like Jonah in the ship of Tarshish.  Pray,"
continues he, "what are you; and on what account did you go to sea?"
Upon that I told him some of my story; at the end of which he burst out
into a strange kind of passion: "What had I done," says he, "that such an
unhappy wretch should come into my ship?  I would not set my foot in the
same ship with thee again for a thousand pounds."  This indeed was, as I
said, an excursion of his spirits, which were yet agitated by the sense
of his loss, and was farther than he could have authority to go.
However, he afterwards talked very gravely to me, exhorting me to go back
to my father, and not tempt Providence to my ruin, telling me I might see
a visible hand of Heaven against me.  "And, young man," said he, "depend
upon it, if you do not go back, wherever you go, you will meet with
nothing but disasters and disappointments, till your father's words are
fulfilled upon you."

We parted soon after; for I made him little answer, and I saw him no
more; which way he went I knew not.  As for me, having some money in my
pocket, I travelled to London by land; and there, as well as on the road,
had many struggles with myself what course of life I should take, and
whether I should go home or to sea.

As to going home, shame opposed the best motions that offered to my
thoughts, and it immediately occurred to me how I should be laughed at
among the neighbours, and should be ashamed to see, not my father and
mother only, but even everybody else; from whence I have since often
observed, how incongruous and irrational the common temper of mankind is,
especially of youth, to that reason which ought to guide them in such
cases--viz. that they are not ashamed to sin, and yet are ashamed to
repent; not ashamed of the action for which they ought justly to be
esteemed fools, but are ashamed of the returning, which only can make
them be esteemed wise men.

In this state of life, however, I remained some time, uncertain what
measures to take, and what course of life to lead.  An irresistible
reluctance continued to going home; and as I stayed away a while, the
remembrance of the distress I had been in wore off, and as that abated,
the little motion I had in my desires to return wore off with it, till at
last I quite laid aside the thoughts of it, and looked out for a voyage.




CHAPTER II--SLAVERY AND ESCAPE


That evil influence which carried me first away from my father's
house--which hurried me into the wild and indigested notion of raising my
fortune, and that impressed those conceits so forcibly upon me as to make
me deaf to all good advice, and to the entreaties and even the commands
of my father--I say, the same influence, whatever it was, presented the
most unfortunate of all enterprises to my view; and I went on board a
vessel bound to the coast of Africa; or, as our sailors vulgarly called
it, a voyage to Guinea.

It was my great misfortune that in all these adventures I did not ship
myself as a sailor; when, though I might indeed have worked a little
harder than ordinary, yet at the same time I should have learnt the duty
and office of a fore-mast man, and in time might have qualified myself
for a mate or lieutenant, if not for a master.  But as it was always my
fate to choose for the worse, so I did here; for having money in my
pocket and good clothes upon my back, I would always go on board in the
habit of a gentleman; and so I neither had any business in the ship, nor
learned to do any.

It was my lot first of all to fall into pretty good company in London,
which does not always happen to such loose and misguided young fellows as
I then was; the devil generally not omitting to lay some snare for them
very early; but it was not so with me.  I first got acquainted with the
master of a ship who had been on the coast of Guinea; and who, having had
very good success there, was resolved to go again.  This captain taking a
fancy to my conversation, which was not at all disagreeable at that time,
hearing me say I had a mind to see the world, told me if I would go the
voyage with him I should be at no expense; I should be his messmate and
his companion; and if I could carry anything with me, I should have all
the advantage of it that the trade would admit; and perhaps I might meet
with some encouragement.

I embraced the offer; and entering into a strict friendship with this
captain, who was an honest, plain-dealing man, I went the voyage with
him, and carried a small adventure with me, which, by the disinterested
honesty of my friend the captain, I increased very considerably; for I
carried about 40 pounds in such toys and trifles as the captain directed
me to buy.  These 40 pounds I had mustered together by the assistance of
some of my relations whom I corresponded with; and who, I believe, got my
father, or at least my mother, to contribute so much as that to my first
adventure.

This was the only voyage which I may say was successful in all my
adventures, which I owe to the integrity and honesty of my friend the
captain; under whom also I got a competent knowledge of the mathematics
and the rules of navigation, learned how to keep an account of the ship's
course, take an observation, and, in short, to understand some things
that were needful to be understood by a sailor; for, as he took delight
to instruct me, I took delight to learn; and, in a word, this voyage made
me both a sailor and a merchant; for I brought home five pounds nine
ounces of gold-dust for my adventure, which yielded me in London, at my
return, almost 300 pounds; and this filled me with those aspiring
thoughts which have since so completed my ruin.

Yet even in this voyage I had my misfortunes too; particularly, that I
was continually sick, being thrown into a violent calenture by the
excessive heat of the climate; our principal trading being upon the
coast, from latitude of 15 degrees north even to the line itself.

I was now set up for a Guinea trader; and my friend, to my great
misfortune, dying soon after his arrival, I resolved to go the same
voyage again, and I embarked in the same vessel with one who was his mate
in the former voyage, and had now got the command of the ship.  This was
the unhappiest voyage that ever man made; for though I did not carry
quite 100 pounds of my new-gained wealth, so that I had 200 pounds left,
which I had lodged with my friend's widow, who was very just to me, yet I
fell into terrible misfortunes.  The first was this: our ship making her
course towards the Canary Islands, or rather between those islands and
the African shore, was surprised in the grey of the morning by a Turkish
rover of Sallee, who gave chase to us with all the sail she could make.
We crowded also as much canvas as our yards would spread, or our masts
carry, to get clear; but finding the pirate gained upon us, and would
certainly come up with us in a few hours, we prepared to fight; our ship
having twelve guns, and the rogue eighteen.  About three in the afternoon
he came up with us, and bringing to, by mistake, just athwart our
quarter, instead of athwart our stern, as he intended, we brought eight
of our guns to bear on that side, and poured in a broadside upon him,
which made him sheer off again, after returning our fire, and pouring in
also his small shot from near two hundred men which he had on board.
However, we had not a man touched, all our men keeping close.  He
prepared to attack us again, and we to defend ourselves.  But laying us
on board the next time upon our other quarter, he entered sixty men upon
our decks, who immediately fell to cutting and hacking the sails and
rigging.  We plied them with small shot, half-pikes, powder-chests, and
such like, and cleared our deck of them twice.  However, to cut short
this melancholy part of our story, our ship being disabled, and three of
our men killed, and eight wounded, we were obliged to yield, and were
carried all prisoners into Sallee, a port belonging to the Moors.

The usage I had there was not so dreadful as at first I apprehended; nor
was I carried up the country to the emperor's court, as the rest of our
men were, but was kept by the captain of the rover as his proper prize,
and made his slave, being young and nimble, and fit for his business.  At
this surprising change of my circumstances, from a merchant to a
miserable slave, I was perfectly overwhelmed; and now I looked back upon
my father's prophetic discourse to me, that I should be miserable and
have none to relieve me, which I thought was now so effectually brought
to pass that I could not be worse; for now the hand of Heaven had
overtaken me, and I was undone without redemption; but, alas! this was
but a taste of the misery I was to go through, as will appear in the
sequel of this story.

As my new patron, or master, had taken me home to his house, so I was in
hopes that he would take me with him when he went to sea again, believing
that it would some time or other be his fate to be taken by a Spanish or
Portugal man-of-war; and that then I should be set at liberty.  But this
hope of mine was soon taken away; for when he went to sea, he left me on
shore to look after his little garden, and do the common drudgery of
slaves about his house; and when he came home again from his cruise, he
ordered me to lie in the cabin to look after the ship.

Here I meditated nothing but my escape, and what method I might take to
effect it, but found no way that had the least probability in it; nothing
presented to make the supposition of it rational; for I had nobody to
communicate it to that would embark with me--no fellow-slave, no
Englishman, Irishman, or Scotchman there but myself; so that for two
years, though I often pleased myself with the imagination, yet I never
had the least encouraging prospect of putting it in practice.

After about two years, an odd circumstance presented itself, which put
the old thought of making some attempt for my liberty again in my head.
My patron lying at home longer than usual without fitting out his ship,
which, as I heard, was for want of money, he used constantly, once or
twice a week, sometimes oftener if the weather was fair, to take the
ship's pinnace and go out into the road a-fishing; and as he always took
me and young Maresco with him to row the boat, we made him very merry,
and I proved very dexterous in catching fish; insomuch that sometimes he
would send me with a Moor, one of his kinsmen, and the youth--the
Maresco, as they called him--to catch a dish of fish for him.

It happened one time, that going a-fishing in a calm morning, a fog rose
so thick that, though we were not half a league from the shore, we lost
sight of it; and rowing we knew not whither or which way, we laboured all
day, and all the next night; and when the morning came we found we had
pulled off to sea instead of pulling in for the shore; and that we were
at least two leagues from the shore.  However, we got well in again,
though with a great deal of labour and some danger; for the wind began to
blow pretty fresh in the morning; but we were all very hungry.

But our patron, warned by this disaster, resolved to take more care of
himself for the future; and having lying by him the longboat of our
English ship that he had taken, he resolved he would not go a-fishing any
more without a compass and some provision; so he ordered the carpenter of
his ship, who also was an English slave, to build a little state-room, or
cabin, in the middle of the long-boat, like that of a barge, with a place
to stand behind it to steer, and haul home the main-sheet; the room
before for a hand or two to stand and work the sails.  She sailed with
what we call a shoulder-of-mutton sail; and the boom jibed over the top
of the cabin, which lay very snug and low, and had in it room for him to
lie, with a slave or two, and a table to eat on, with some small lockers
to put in some bottles of such liquor as he thought fit to drink; and his
bread, rice, and coffee.

We went frequently out with this boat a-fishing; and as I was most
dexterous to catch fish for him, he never went without me.  It happened
that he had appointed to go out in this boat, either for pleasure or for
fish, with two or three Moors of some distinction in that place, and for
whom he had provided extraordinarily, and had, therefore, sent on board
the boat overnight a larger store of provisions than ordinary; and had
ordered me to get ready three fusees with powder and shot, which were on
board his ship, for that they designed some sport of fowling as well as
fishing.

I got all things ready as he had directed, and waited the next morning
with the boat washed clean, her ancient and pendants out, and everything
to accommodate his guests; when by-and-by my patron came on board alone,
and told me his guests had put off going from some business that fell
out, and ordered me, with the man and boy, as usual, to go out with the
boat and catch them some fish, for that his friends were to sup at his
house, and commanded that as soon as I got some fish I should bring it
home to his house; all which I prepared to do.

This moment my former notions of deliverance darted into my thoughts, for
now I found I was likely to have a little ship at my command; and my
master being gone, I prepared to furnish myself, not for fishing
business, but for a voyage; though I knew not, neither did I so much as
consider, whither I should steer--anywhere to get out of that place was
my desire.

My first contrivance was to make a pretence to speak to this Moor, to get
something for our subsistence on board; for I told him we must not
presume to eat of our patron's bread.  He said that was true; so he
brought a large basket of rusk or biscuit, and three jars of fresh water,
into the boat.  I knew where my patron's case of bottles stood, which it
was evident, by the make, were taken out of some English prize, and I
conveyed them into the boat while the Moor was on shore, as if they had
been there before for our master.  I conveyed also a great lump of
beeswax into the boat, which weighed about half a hundred-weight, with a
parcel of twine or thread, a hatchet, a saw, and a hammer, all of which
were of great use to us afterwards, especially the wax, to make candles.
Another trick I tried upon him, which he innocently came into also: his
name was Ismael, which they call Muley, or Moely; so I called to
him--"Moely," said I, "our patron's guns are on board the boat; can you
not get a little powder and shot?  It may be we may kill some alcamies (a
fowl like our curlews) for ourselves, for I know he keeps the gunner's
stores in the ship."  "Yes," says he, "I'll bring some;" and accordingly
he brought a great leather pouch, which held a pound and a half of
powder, or rather more; and another with shot, that had five or six
pounds, with some bullets, and put all into the boat.  At the same time I
had found some powder of my master's in the great cabin, with which I
filled one of the large bottles in the case, which was almost empty,
pouring what was in it into another; and thus furnished with everything
needful, we sailed out of the port to fish.  The castle, which is at the
entrance of the port, knew who we were, and took no notice of us; and we
were not above a mile out of the port before we hauled in our sail and
set us down to fish.  The wind blew from the N.N.E., which was contrary
to my desire, for had it blown southerly I had been sure to have made the
coast of Spain, and at least reached to the bay of Cadiz; but my
resolutions were, blow which way it would, I would be gone from that
horrid place where I was, and leave the rest to fate.

After we had fished some time and caught nothing--for when I had fish on
my hook I would not pull them up, that he might not see them--I said to
the Moor, "This will not do; our master will not be thus served; we must
stand farther off."  He, thinking no harm, agreed, and being in the head
of the boat, set the sails; and, as I had the helm, I ran the boat out
near a league farther, and then brought her to, as if I would fish; when,
giving the boy the helm, I stepped forward to where the Moor was, and
making as if I stooped for something behind him, I took him by surprise
with my arm under his waist, and tossed him clear overboard into the sea.
He rose immediately, for he swam like a cork, and called to me, begged to
be taken in, told me he would go all over the world with me.  He swam so
strong after the boat that he would have reached me very quickly, there
being but little wind; upon which I stepped into the cabin, and fetching
one of the fowling-pieces, I presented it at him, and told him I had done
him no hurt, and if he would be quiet I would do him none.  "But," said
I, "you swim well enough to reach to the shore, and the sea is calm; make
the best of your way to shore, and I will do you no harm; but if you come
near the boat I'll shoot you through the head, for I am resolved to have
my liberty;" so he turned himself about, and swam for the shore, and I
make no doubt but he reached it with ease, for he was an excellent
swimmer.

I could have been content to have taken this Moor with me, and have
drowned the boy, but there was no venturing to trust him.  When he was
gone, I turned to the boy, whom they called Xury, and said to him, "Xury,
if you will be faithful to me, I'll make you a great man; but if you will
not stroke your face to be true to me"--that is, swear by Mahomet and his
father's beard--"I must throw you into the sea too."  The boy smiled in
my face, and spoke so innocently that I could not distrust him, and swore
to be faithful to me, and go all over the world with me.

While I was in view of the Moor that was swimming, I stood out directly
to sea with the boat, rather stretching to windward, that they might
think me gone towards the Straits' mouth (as indeed any one that had been
in their wits must have been supposed to do): for who would have supposed
we were sailed on to the southward, to the truly Barbarian coast, where
whole nations of negroes were sure to surround us with their canoes and
destroy us; where we could not go on shore but we should be devoured by
savage beasts, or more merciless savages of human kind.

But as soon as it grew dusk in the evening, I changed my course, and
steered directly south and by east, bending my course a little towards
the east, that I might keep in with the shore; and having a fair, fresh
gale of wind, and a smooth, quiet sea, I made such sail that I believe by
the next day, at three o'clock in the afternoon, when I first made the
land, I could not be less than one hundred and fifty miles south of
Sallee; quite beyond the Emperor of Morocco's dominions, or indeed of any
other king thereabouts, for we saw no people.

Yet such was the fright I had taken of the Moors, and the dreadful
apprehensions I had of falling into their hands, that I would not stop,
or go on shore, or come to an anchor; the wind continuing fair till I had
sailed in that manner five days; and then the wind shifting to the
southward, I concluded also that if any of our vessels were in chase of
me, they also would now give over; so I ventured to make to the coast,
and came to an anchor in the mouth of a little river, I knew not what,
nor where, neither what latitude, what country, what nation, or what
river.  I neither saw, nor desired to see any people; the principal thing
I wanted was fresh water.  We came into this creek in the evening,
resolving to swim on shore as soon as it was dark, and discover the
country; but as soon as it was quite dark, we heard such dreadful noises
of the barking, roaring, and howling of wild creatures, of we knew not
what kinds, that the poor boy was ready to die with fear, and begged of
me not to go on shore till day.  "Well, Xury," said I, "then I won't; but
it may be that we may see men by day, who will be as bad to us as those
lions."  "Then we give them the shoot gun," says Xury, laughing, "make
them run wey."  Such English Xury spoke by conversing among us slaves.
However, I was glad to see the boy so cheerful, and I gave him a dram
(out of our patron's case of bottles) to cheer him up.  After all, Xury's
advice was good, and I took it; we dropped our little anchor, and lay
still all night; I say still, for we slept none; for in two or three
hours we saw vast great creatures (we knew not what to call them) of many
sorts, come down to the sea-shore and run into the water, wallowing and
washing themselves for the pleasure of cooling themselves; and they made
such hideous howlings and yellings, that I never indeed heard the like.

Xury was dreadfully frighted, and indeed so was I too; but we were both
more frighted when we heard one of these mighty creatures come swimming
towards our boat; we could not see him, but we might hear him by his
blowing to be a monstrous huge and furious beast.  Xury said it was a
lion, and it might be so for aught I know; but poor Xury cried to me to
weigh the anchor and row away; "No," says I, "Xury; we can slip our
cable, with the buoy to it, and go off to sea; they cannot follow us
far."  I had no sooner said so, but I perceived the creature (whatever it
was) within two oars' length, which something surprised me; however, I
immediately stepped to the cabin door, and taking up my gun, fired at
him; upon which he immediately turned about and swam towards the shore
again.

But it is impossible to describe the horrid noises, and hideous cries and
howlings that were raised, as well upon the edge of the shore as higher
within the country, upon the noise or report of the gun, a thing I have
some reason to believe those creatures had never heard before: this
convinced me that there was no going on shore for us in the night on that
coast, and how to venture on shore in the day was another question too;
for to have fallen into the hands of any of the savages had been as bad
as to have fallen into the hands of the lions and tigers; at least we
were equally apprehensive of the danger of it.

Be that as it would, we were obliged to go on shore somewhere or other
for water, for we had not a pint left in the boat; when and where to get
to it was the point.  Xury said, if I would let him go on shore with one
of the jars, he would find if there was any water, and bring some to me.
I asked him why he would go? why I should not go, and he stay in the
boat?  The boy answered with so much affection as made me love him ever
after.  Says he, "If wild mans come, they eat me, you go wey."  "Well,
Xury," said I, "we will both go and if the wild mans come, we will kill
them, they shall eat neither of us."  So I gave Xury a piece of rusk
bread to eat, and a dram out of our patron's case of bottles which I
mentioned before; and we hauled the boat in as near the shore as we
thought was proper, and so waded on shore, carrying nothing but our arms
and two jars for water.

I did not care to go out of sight of the boat, fearing the coming of
canoes with savages down the river; but the boy seeing a low place about
a mile up the country, rambled to it, and by-and-by I saw him come
running towards me.  I thought he was pursued by some savage, or frighted
with some wild beast, and I ran forward towards him to help him; but when
I came nearer to him I saw something hanging over his shoulders, which
was a creature that he had shot, like a hare, but different in colour,
and longer legs; however, we were very glad of it, and it was very good
meat; but the great joy that poor Xury came with, was to tell me he had
found good water and seen no wild mans.

But we found afterwards that we need not take such pains for water, for a
little higher up the creek where we were we found the water fresh when
the tide was out, which flowed but a little way up; so we filled our
jars, and feasted on the hare he had killed, and prepared to go on our
way, having seen no footsteps of any human creature in that part of the
country.

As I had been one voyage to this coast before, I knew very well that the
islands of the Canaries, and the Cape de Verde Islands also, lay not far
off from the coast.  But as I had no instruments to take an observation
to know what latitude we were in, and not exactly knowing, or at least
remembering, what latitude they were in, I knew not where to look for
them, or when to stand off to sea towards them; otherwise I might now
easily have found some of these islands.  But my hope was, that if I
stood along this coast till I came to that part where the English traded,
I should find some of their vessels upon their usual design of trade,
that would relieve and take us in.

By the best of my calculation, that place where I now was must be that
country which, lying between the Emperor of Morocco's dominions and the
negroes, lies waste and uninhabited, except by wild beasts; the negroes
having abandoned it and gone farther south for fear of the Moors, and the
Moors not thinking it worth inhabiting by reason of its barrenness; and
indeed, both forsaking it because of the prodigious number of tigers,
lions, leopards, and other furious creatures which harbour there; so that
the Moors use it for their hunting only, where they go like an army, two
or three thousand men at a time; and indeed for near a hundred miles
together upon this coast we saw nothing but a waste, uninhabited country
by day, and heard nothing but howlings and roaring of wild beasts by
night.

Once or twice in the daytime I thought I saw the Pico of Teneriffe, being
the high top of the Mountain Teneriffe in the Canaries, and had a great
mind to venture out, in hopes of reaching thither; but having tried
twice, I was forced in again by contrary winds, the sea also going too
high for my little vessel; so, I resolved to pursue my first design, and
keep along the shore.

Several times I was obliged to land for fresh water, after we had left
this place; and once in particular, being early in morning, we came to an
anchor under a little point of land, which was pretty high; and the tide
beginning to flow, we lay still to go farther in.  Xury, whose eyes were
more about him than it seems mine were, calls softly to me, and tells me
that we had best go farther off the shore; "For," says he, "look, yonder
lies a dreadful monster on the side of that hillock, fast asleep."  I
looked where he pointed, and saw a dreadful monster indeed, for it was a
terrible, great lion that lay on the side of the shore, under the shade
of a piece of the hill that hung as it were a little over him.  "Xury,"
says I, "you shall on shore and kill him."  Xury, looked frighted, and
said, "Me kill! he eat me at one mouth!"--one mouthful he meant.
However, I said no more to the boy, but bade him lie still, and I took
our biggest gun, which was almost musket-bore, and loaded it with a good
charge of powder, and with two slugs, and laid it down; then I loaded
another gun with two bullets; and the third (for we had three pieces) I
loaded with five smaller bullets.  I took the best aim I could with the
first piece to have shot him in the head, but he lay so with his leg
raised a little above his nose, that the slugs hit his leg about the knee
and broke the bone.  He started up, growling at first, but finding his
leg broken, fell down again; and then got upon three legs, and gave the
most hideous roar that ever I heard.  I was a little surprised that I had
not hit him on the head; however, I took up the second piece immediately,
and though he began to move off, fired again, and shot him in the head,
and had the pleasure to see him drop and make but little noise, but lie
struggling for life.  Then Xury took heart, and would have me let him go
on shore.  "Well, go," said I: so the boy jumped into the water and
taking a little gun in one hand, swam to shore with the other hand, and
coming close to the creature, put the muzzle of the piece to his ear, and
shot him in the head again, which despatched him quite.

This was game indeed to us, but this was no food; and I was very sorry to
lose three charges of powder and shot upon a creature that was good for
nothing to us.  However, Xury said he would have some of him; so he comes
on board, and asked me to give him the hatchet.  "For what, Xury?" said
I.  "Me cut off his head," said he.  However, Xury could not cut off his
head, but he cut off a foot, and brought it with him, and it was a
monstrous great one.

I bethought myself, however, that, perhaps the skin of him might, one way
or other, be of some value to us; and I resolved to take off his skin if
I could.  So Xury and I went to work with him; but Xury was much the
better workman at it, for I knew very ill how to do it.  Indeed, it took
us both up the whole day, but at last we got off the hide of him, and
spreading it on the top of our cabin, the sun effectually dried it in two
days' time, and it afterwards served me to lie upon.




CHAPTER III--WRECKED ON A DESERT ISLAND


After this stop, we made on to the southward continually for ten or
twelve days, living very sparingly on our provisions, which began to
abate very much, and going no oftener to the shore than we were obliged
to for fresh water.  My design in this was to make the river Gambia or
Senegal, that is to say anywhere about the Cape de Verde, where I was in
hopes to meet with some European ship; and if I did not, I knew not what
course I had to take, but to seek for the islands, or perish there among
the negroes.  I knew that all the ships from Europe, which sailed either
to the coast of Guinea or to Brazil, or to the East Indies, made this
cape, or those islands; and, in a word, I put the whole of my fortune
upon this single point, either that I must meet with some ship or must
perish.

When I had pursued this resolution about ten days longer, as I have said,
I began to see that the land was inhabited; and in two or three places,
as we sailed by, we saw people stand upon the shore to look at us; we
could also perceive they were quite black and naked.  I was once inclined
to have gone on shore to them; but Xury was my better counsellor, and
said to me, "No go, no go."  However, I hauled in nearer the shore that I
might talk to them, and I found they ran along the shore by me a good
way.  I observed they had no weapons in their hand, except one, who had a
long slender stick, which Xury said was a lance, and that they could
throw them a great way with good aim; so I kept at a distance, but talked
with them by signs as well as I could; and particularly made signs for
something to eat: they beckoned to me to stop my boat, and they would
fetch me some meat.  Upon this I lowered the top of my sail and lay by,
and two of them ran up into the country, and in less than half-an-hour
came back, and brought with them two pieces of dried flesh and some corn,
such as is the produce of their country; but we neither knew what the one
or the other was; however, we were willing to accept it, but how to come
at it was our next dispute, for I would not venture on shore to them, and
they were as much afraid of us; but they took a safe way for us all, for
they brought it to the shore and laid it down, and went and stood a great
way off till we fetched it on board, and then came close to us again.

We made signs of thanks to them, for we had nothing to make them amends;
but an opportunity offered that very instant to oblige them wonderfully;
for while we were lying by the shore came two mighty creatures, one
pursuing the other (as we took it) with great fury from the mountains
towards the sea; whether it was the male pursuing the female, or whether
they were in sport or in rage, we could not tell, any more than we could
tell whether it was usual or strange, but I believe it was the latter;
because, in the first place, those ravenous creatures seldom appear but
in the night; and, in the second place, we found the people terribly
frighted, especially the women.  The man that had the lance or dart did
not fly from them, but the rest did; however, as the two creatures ran
directly into the water, they did not offer to fall upon any of the
negroes, but plunged themselves into the sea, and swam about, as if they
had come for their diversion; at last one of them began to come nearer
our boat than at first I expected; but I lay ready for him, for I had
loaded my gun with all possible expedition, and bade Xury load both the
others.  As soon as he came fairly within my reach, I fired, and shot him
directly in the head; immediately he sank down into the water, but rose
instantly, and plunged up and down, as if he were struggling for life,
and so indeed he was; he immediately made to the shore; but between the
wound, which was his mortal hurt, and the strangling of the water, he
died just before he reached the shore.

It is impossible to express the astonishment of these poor creatures at
the noise and fire of my gun: some of them were even ready to die for
fear, and fell down as dead with the very terror; but when they saw the
creature dead, and sunk in the water, and that I made signs to them to
come to the shore, they took heart and came, and began to search for the
creature.  I found him by his blood staining the water; and by the help
of a rope, which I slung round him, and gave the negroes to haul, they
dragged him on shore, and found that it was a most curious leopard,
spotted, and fine to an admirable degree; and the negroes held up their
hands with admiration, to think what it was I had killed him with.

The other creature, frighted with the flash of fire and the noise of the
gun, swam on shore, and ran up directly to the mountains from whence they
came; nor could I, at that distance, know what it was.  I found quickly
the negroes wished to eat the flesh of this creature, so I was willing to
have them take it as a favour from me; which, when I made signs to them
that they might take him, they were very thankful for.  Immediately they
fell to work with him; and though they had no knife, yet, with a
sharpened piece of wood, they took off his skin as readily, and much more
readily, than we could have done with a knife.  They offered me some of
the flesh, which I declined, pointing out that I would give it them; but
made signs for the skin, which they gave me very freely, and brought me a
great deal more of their provisions, which, though I did not understand,
yet I accepted.  I then made signs to them for some water, and held out
one of my jars to them, turning it bottom upward, to show that it was
empty, and that I wanted to have it filled.  They called immediately to
some of their friends, and there came two women, and brought a great
vessel made of earth, and burnt, as I supposed, in the sun, this they set
down to me, as before, and I sent Xury on shore with my jars, and filled
them all three.  The women were as naked as the men.

I was now furnished with roots and corn, such as it was, and water; and
leaving my friendly negroes, I made forward for about eleven days more,
without offering to go near the shore, till I saw the land run out a
great length into the sea, at about the distance of four or five leagues
before me; and the sea being very calm, I kept a large offing to make
this point.  At length, doubling the point, at about two leagues from the
land, I saw plainly land on the other side, to seaward; then I concluded,
as it was most certain indeed, that this was the Cape de Verde, and those
the islands called, from thence, Cape de Verde Islands.  However, they
were at a great distance, and I could not well tell what I had best to
do; for if I should be taken with a fresh of wind, I might neither reach
one or other.

In this dilemma, as I was very pensive, I stepped into the cabin and sat
down, Xury having the helm; when, on a sudden, the boy cried out,
"Master, master, a ship with a sail!" and the foolish boy was frighted
out of his wits, thinking it must needs be some of his master's ships
sent to pursue us, but I knew we were far enough out of their reach.  I
jumped out of the cabin, and immediately saw, not only the ship, but that
it was a Portuguese ship; and, as I thought, was bound to the coast of
Guinea, for negroes.  But, when I observed the course she steered, I was
soon convinced they were bound some other way, and did not design to come
any nearer to the shore; upon which I stretched out to sea as much as I
could, resolving to speak with them if possible.

With all the sail I could make, I found I should not be able to come in
their way, but that they would be gone by before I could make any signal
to them: but after I had crowded to the utmost, and began to despair,
they, it seems, saw by the help of their glasses that it was some
European boat, which they supposed must belong to some ship that was
lost; so they shortened sail to let me come up.  I was encouraged with
this, and as I had my patron's ancient on board, I made a waft of it to
them, for a signal of distress, and fired a gun, both which they saw; for
they told me they saw the smoke, though they did not hear the gun.  Upon
these signals they very kindly brought to, and lay by for me; and in
about three hours; time I came up with them.

They asked me what I was, in Portuguese, and in Spanish, and in French,
but I understood none of them; but at last a Scotch sailor, who was on
board, called to me: and I answered him, and told him I was an
Englishman, that I had made my escape out of slavery from the Moors, at
Sallee; they then bade me come on board, and very kindly took me in, and
all my goods.

It was an inexpressible joy to me, which any one will believe, that I was
thus delivered, as I esteemed it, from such a miserable and almost
hopeless condition as I was in; and I immediately offered all I had to
the captain of the ship, as a return for my deliverance; but he
generously told me he would take nothing from me, but that all I had
should be delivered safe to me when I came to the Brazils.  "For," says
he, "I have saved your life on no other terms than I would be glad to be
saved myself: and it may, one time or other, be my lot to be taken up in
the same condition.  Besides," said he, "when I carry you to the Brazils,
so great a way from your own country, if I should take from you what you
have, you will be starved there, and then I only take away that life I
have given.  No, no," says he: "Seignior Inglese" (Mr. Englishman), "I
will carry you thither in charity, and those things will help to buy your
subsistence there, and your passage home again."

As he was charitable in this proposal, so he was just in the performance
to a tittle; for he ordered the seamen that none should touch anything
that I had: then he took everything into his own possession, and gave me
back an exact inventory of them, that I might have them, even to my three
earthen jars.

As to my boat, it was a very good one; and that he saw, and told me he
would buy it of me for his ship's use; and asked me what I would have for
it?  I told him he had been so generous to me in everything that I could
not offer to make any price of the boat, but left it entirely to him:
upon which he told me he would give me a note of hand to pay me eighty
pieces of eight for it at Brazil; and when it came there, if any one
offered to give more, he would make it up.  He offered me also sixty
pieces of eight more for my boy Xury, which I was loth to take; not that
I was unwilling to let the captain have him, but I was very loth to sell
the poor boy's liberty, who had assisted me so faithfully in procuring my
own.  However, when I let him know my reason, he owned it to be just, and
offered me this medium, that he would give the boy an obligation to set
him free in ten years, if he turned Christian: upon this, and Xury saying
he was willing to go to him, I let the captain have him.

We had a very good voyage to the Brazils, and I arrived in the Bay de
Todos los Santos, or All Saints' Bay, in about twenty-two days after.
And now I was once more delivered from the most miserable of all
conditions of life; and what to do next with myself I was to consider.

The generous treatment the captain gave me I can never enough remember:
he would take nothing of me for my passage, gave me twenty ducats for the
leopard's skin, and forty for the lion's skin, which I had in my boat,
and caused everything I had in the ship to be punctually delivered to me;
and what I was willing to sell he bought of me, such as the case of
bottles, two of my guns, and a piece of the lump of beeswax--for I had
made candles of the rest: in a word, I made about two hundred and twenty
pieces of eight of all my cargo; and with this stock I went on shore in
the Brazils.

I had not been long here before I was recommended to the house of a good
honest man like himself, who had an _ingenio_, as they call it (that is,
a plantation and a sugar-house).  I lived with him some time, and
acquainted myself by that means with the manner of planting and making of
sugar; and seeing how well the planters lived, and how they got rich
suddenly, I resolved, if I could get a licence to settle there, I would
turn planter among them: resolving in the meantime to find out some way
to get my money, which I had left in London, remitted to me.  To this
purpose, getting a kind of letter of naturalisation, I purchased as much
land that was uncured as my money would reach, and formed a plan for my
plantation and settlement; such a one as might be suitable to the stock
which I proposed to myself to receive from England.

I had a neighbour, a Portuguese, of Lisbon, but born of English parents,
whose name was Wells, and in much such circumstances as I was.  I call
him my neighbour, because his plantation lay next to mine, and we went on
very sociably together.  My stock was but low, as well as his; and we
rather planted for food than anything else, for about two years.
However, we began to increase, and our land began to come into order; so
that the third year we planted some tobacco, and made each of us a large
piece of ground ready for planting canes in the year to come.  But we
both wanted help; and now I found, more than before, I had done wrong in
parting with my boy Xury.

But, alas! for me to do wrong that never did right, was no great wonder.
I hail no remedy but to go on: I had got into an employment quite remote
to my genius, and directly contrary to the life I delighted in, and for
which I forsook my father's house, and broke through all his good advice.
Nay, I was coming into the very middle station, or upper degree of low
life, which my father advised me to before, and which, if I resolved to
go on with, I might as well have stayed at home, and never have fatigued
myself in the world as I had done; and I used often to say to myself, I
could have done this as well in England, among my friends, as have gone
five thousand miles off to do it among strangers and savages, in a
wilderness, and at such a distance as never to hear from any part of the
world that had the least knowledge of me.

In this manner I used to look upon my condition with the utmost regret.
I had nobody to converse with, but now and then this neighbour; no work
to be done, but by the labour of my hands; and I used to say, I lived
just like a man cast away upon some desolate island, that had nobody
there but himself.  But how just has it been--and how should all men
reflect, that when they compare their present conditions with others that
are worse, Heaven may oblige them to make the exchange, and be convinced
of their former felicity by their experience--I say, how just has it
been, that the truly solitary life I reflected on, in an island of mere
desolation, should be my lot, who had so often unjustly compared it with
the life which I then led, in which, had I continued, I had in all
probability been exceeding prosperous and rich.

I was in some degree settled in my measures for carrying on the
plantation before my kind friend, the captain of the ship that took me up
at sea, went back--for the ship remained there, in providing his lading
and preparing for his voyage, nearly three months--when telling him what
little stock I had left behind me in London, he gave me this friendly and
sincere advice:--"Seignior Inglese," says he (for so he always called
me), "if you will give me letters, and a procuration in form to me, with
orders to the person who has your money in London to send your effects to
Lisbon, to such persons as I shall direct, and in such goods as are
proper for this country, I will bring you the produce of them, God
willing, at my return; but, since human affairs are all subject to
changes and disasters, I would have you give orders but for one hundred
pounds sterling, which, you say, is half your stock, and let the hazard
be run for the first; so that, if it come safe, you may order the rest
the same way, and, if it miscarry, you may have the other half to have
recourse to for your supply."

This was so wholesome advice, and looked so friendly, that I could not
but be convinced it was the best course I could take; so I accordingly
prepared letters to the gentlewoman with whom I had left my money, and a
procuration to the Portuguese captain, as he desired.

I wrote the English captain's widow a full account of all my
adventures--my slavery, escape, and how I had met with the Portuguese
captain at sea, the humanity of his behaviour, and what condition I was
now in, with all other necessary directions for my supply; and when this
honest captain came to Lisbon, he found means, by some of the English
merchants there, to send over, not the order only, but a full account of
my story to a merchant in London, who represented it effectually to her;
whereupon she not only delivered the money, but out of her own pocket
sent the Portugal captain a very handsome present for his humanity and
charity to me.

The merchant in London, vesting this hundred pounds in English goods,
such as the captain had written for, sent them directly to him at Lisbon,
and he brought them all safe to me to the Brazils; among which, without
my direction (for I was too young in my business to think of them), he
had taken care to have all sorts of tools, ironwork, and utensils
necessary for my plantation, and which were of great use to me.

When this cargo arrived I thought my fortune made, for I was surprised
with the joy of it; and my stood steward, the captain, had laid out the
five pounds, which my friend had sent him for a present for himself, to
purchase and bring me over a servant, under bond for six years' service,
and would not accept of any consideration, except a little tobacco, which
I would have him accept, being of my own produce.

Neither was this all; for my goods being all English manufacture, such as
cloths, stuffs, baize, and things particularly valuable and desirable in
the country, I found means to sell them to a very great advantage; so
that I might say I had more than four times the value of my first cargo,
and was now infinitely beyond my poor neighbour--I mean in the
advancement of my plantation; for the first thing I did, I bought me a
negro slave, and an European servant also--I mean another besides that
which the captain brought me from Lisbon.

But as abused prosperity is oftentimes made the very means of our
greatest adversity, so it was with me.  I went on the next year with
great success in my plantation: I raised fifty great rolls of tobacco on
my own ground, more than I had disposed of for necessaries among my
neighbours; and these fifty rolls, being each of above a hundredweight,
were well cured, and laid by against the return of the fleet from Lisbon:
and now increasing in business and wealth, my head began to be full of
projects and undertakings beyond my reach; such as are, indeed, often the
ruin of the best heads in business.  Had I continued in the station I was
now in, I had room for all the happy things to have yet befallen me for
which my father so earnestly recommended a quiet, retired life, and of
which he had so sensibly described the middle station of life to be full
of; but other things attended me, and I was still to be the wilful agent
of all my own miseries; and particularly, to increase my fault, and
double the reflections upon myself, which in my future sorrows I should
have leisure to make, all these miscarriages were procured by my apparent
obstinate adhering to my foolish inclination of wandering abroad, and
pursuing that inclination, in contradiction to the clearest views of
doing myself good in a fair and plain pursuit of those prospects, and
those measures of life, which nature and Providence concurred to present
me with, and to make my duty.

As I had once done thus in my breaking away from my parents, so I could
not be content now, but I must go and leave the happy view I had of being
a rich and thriving man in my new plantation, only to pursue a rash and
immoderate desire of rising faster than the nature of the thing admitted;
and thus I cast myself down again into the deepest gulf of human misery
that ever man fell into, or perhaps could be consistent with life and a
state of health in the world.

To come, then, by the just degrees to the particulars of this part of my
story.  You may suppose, that having now lived almost four years in the
Brazils, and beginning to thrive and prosper very well upon my
plantation, I had not only learned the language, but had contracted
acquaintance and friendship among my fellow-planters, as well as among
the merchants at St. Salvador, which was our port; and that, in my
discourses among them, I had frequently given them an account of my two
voyages to the coast of Guinea: the manner of trading with the negroes
there, and how easy it was to purchase upon the coast for trifles--such
as beads, toys, knives, scissors, hatchets, bits of glass, and the
like--not only gold-dust, Guinea grains, elephants' teeth, &c., but
negroes, for the service of the Brazils, in great numbers.

They listened always very attentively to my discourses on these heads,
but especially to that part which related to the buying of negroes, which
was a trade at that time, not only not far entered into, but, as far as
it was, had been carried on by assientos, or permission of the kings of
Spain and Portugal, and engrossed in the public stock: so that few
negroes were bought, and these excessively dear.

It happened, being in company with some merchants and planters of my
acquaintance, and talking of those things very earnestly, three of them
came to me next morning, and told me they had been musing very much upon
what I had discoursed with them of the last night, and they came to make
a secret proposal to me; and, after enjoining me to secrecy, they told me
that they had a mind to fit out a ship to go to Guinea; that they had all
plantations as well as I, and were straitened for nothing so much as
servants; that as it was a trade that could not be carried on, because
they could not publicly sell the negroes when they came home, so they
desired to make but one voyage, to bring the negroes on shore privately,
and divide them among their own plantations; and, in a word, the question
was whether I would go their supercargo in the ship, to manage the
trading part upon the coast of Guinea; and they offered me that I should
have my equal share of the negroes, without providing any part of the
stock.

This was a fair proposal, it must be confessed, had it been made to any
one that had not had a settlement and a plantation of his own to look
after, which was in a fair way of coming to be very considerable, and
with a good stock upon it; but for me, that was thus entered and
established, and had nothing to do but to go on as I had begun, for three
or four years more, and to have sent for the other hundred pounds from
England; and who in that time, and with that little addition, could
scarce have failed of being worth three or four thousand pounds sterling,
and that increasing too--for me to think of such a voyage was the most
preposterous thing that ever man in such circumstances could be guilty
of.

But I, that was born to be my own destroyer, could no more resist the
offer than I could restrain my first rambling designs when my father'
good counsel was lost upon me.  In a word, I told them I would go with
all my heart, if they would undertake to look after my plantation in my
absence, and would dispose of it to such as I should direct, if I
miscarried.  This they all engaged to do, and entered into writings or
covenants to do so; and I made a formal will, disposing of my plantation
and effects in case of my death, making the captain of the ship that had
saved my life, as before, my universal heir, but obliging him to dispose
of my effects as I had directed in my will; one half of the produce being
to himself, and the other to be shipped to England.

In short, I took all possible caution to preserve my effects and to keep
up my plantation.  Had I used half as much prudence to have looked into
my own interest, and have made a judgment of what I ought to have done
and not to have done, I had certainly never gone away from so prosperous
an undertaking, leaving all the probable views of a thriving
circumstance, and gone upon a voyage to sea, attended with all its common
hazards, to say nothing of the reasons I had to expect particular
misfortunes to myself.

But I was hurried on, and obeyed blindly the dictates of my fancy rather
than my reason; and, accordingly, the ship being fitted out, and the
cargo furnished, and all things done, as by agreement, by my partners in
the voyage, I went on board in an evil hour, the 1st September 1659,
being the same day eight years that I went from my father and mother at
Hull, in order to act the rebel to their authority, and the fool to my
own interests.

Our ship was about one hundred and twenty tons burden, carried six guns
and fourteen men, besides the master, his boy, and myself.  We had on
board no large cargo of goods, except of such toys as were fit for our
trade with the negroes, such as beads, bits of glass, shells, and other
trifles, especially little looking-glasses, knives, scissors, hatchets,
and the like.

The same day I went on board we set sail, standing away to the northward
upon our own coast, with design to stretch over for the African coast
when we came about ten or twelve degrees of northern latitude, which, it
seems, was the manner of course in those days.  We had very good weather,
only excessively hot, all the way upon our own coast, till we came to the
height of Cape St. Augustino; from whence, keeping further off at sea, we
lost sight of land, and steered as if we were bound for the isle Fernando
de Noronha, holding our course N.E. by N., and leaving those isles on the
east.  In this course we passed the line in about twelve days' time, and
were, by our last observation, in seven degrees twenty-two minutes
northern latitude, when a violent tornado, or hurricane, took us quite
out of our knowledge.  It began from the south-east, came about to the
north-west, and then settled in the north-east; from whence it blew in
such a terrible manner, that for twelve days together we could do nothing
but drive, and, scudding away before it, let it carry us whither fate and
the fury of the winds directed; and, during these twelve days, I need not
say that I expected every day to be swallowed up; nor, indeed, did any in
the ship expect to save their lives.

In this distress we had, besides the terror of the storm, one of our men
die of the calenture, and one man and the boy washed overboard.  About
the twelfth day, the weather abating a little, the master made an
observation as well as he could, and found that he was in about eleven
degrees north latitude, but that he was twenty-two degrees of longitude
difference west from Cape St. Augustino; so that he found he was upon the
coast of Guiana, or the north part of Brazil, beyond the river Amazon,
toward that of the river Orinoco, commonly called the Great River; and
began to consult with me what course he should take, for the ship was
leaky, and very much disabled, and he was going directly back to the
coast of Brazil.

I was positively against that; and looking over the charts of the
sea-coast of America with him, we concluded there was no inhabited
country for us to have recourse to till we came within the circle of the
Caribbee Islands, and therefore resolved to stand away for Barbadoes;
which, by keeping off at sea, to avoid the indraft of the Bay or Gulf of
Mexico, we might easily perform, as we hoped, in about fifteen days'
sail; whereas we could not possibly make our voyage to the coast of
Africa without some assistance both to our ship and to ourselves.

With this design we changed our course, and steered away N.W. by W., in
order to reach some of our English islands, where I hoped for relief.
But our voyage was otherwise determined; for, being in the latitude of
twelve degrees eighteen minutes, a second storm came upon us, which
carried us away with the same impetuosity westward, and drove us so out
of the way of all human commerce, that, had all our lives been saved as
to the sea, we were rather in danger of being devoured by savages than
ever returning to our own country.

In this distress, the wind still blowing very hard, one of our men early
in the morning cried out, "Land!" and we had no sooner run out of the
cabin to look out, in hopes of seeing whereabouts in the world we were,
than the ship struck upon a sand, and in a moment her motion being so
stopped, the sea broke over her in such a manner that we expected we
should all have perished immediately; and we were immediately driven into
our close quarters, to shelter us from the very foam and spray of the
sea.

It is not easy for any one who has not been in the like condition to
describe or conceive the consternation of men in such circumstances.  We
knew nothing where we were, or upon what land it was we were
driven--whether an island or the main, whether inhabited or not
inhabited.  As the rage of the wind was still great, though rather less
than at first, we could not so much as hope to have the ship hold many
minutes without breaking into pieces, unless the winds, by a kind of
miracle, should turn immediately about.  In a word, we sat looking upon
one another, and expecting death every moment, and every man,
accordingly, preparing for another world; for there was little or nothing
more for us to do in this.  That which was our present comfort, and all
the comfort we had, was that, contrary to our expectation, the ship did
not break yet, and that the master said the wind began to abate.

Now, though we thought that the wind did a little abate, yet the ship
having thus struck upon the sand, and sticking too fast for us to expect
her getting off, we were in a dreadful condition indeed, and had nothing
to do but to think of saving our lives as well as we could.  We had a
boat at our stern just before the storm, but she was first staved by
dashing against the ship's rudder, and in the next place she broke away,
and either sunk or was driven off to sea; so there was no hope from her.
We had another boat on board, but how to get her off into the sea was a
doubtful thing.  However, there was no time to debate, for we fancied
that the ship would break in pieces every minute, and some told us she
was actually broken already.

In this distress the mate of our vessel laid hold of the boat, and with
the help of the rest of the men got her slung over the ship's side; and
getting all into her, let go, and committed ourselves, being eleven in
number, to God's mercy and the wild sea; for though the storm was abated
considerably, yet the sea ran dreadfully high upon the shore, and might
be well called _den wild zee_, as the Dutch call the sea in a storm.

And now our case was very dismal indeed; for we all saw plainly that the
sea went so high that the boat could not live, and that we should be
inevitably drowned.  As to making sail, we had none, nor if we had could
we have done anything with it; so we worked at the oar towards the land,
though with heavy hearts, like men going to execution; for we all knew
that when the boat came near the shore she would be dashed in a thousand
pieces by the breach of the sea.  However, we committed our souls to God
in the most earnest manner; and the wind driving us towards the shore, we
hastened our destruction with our own hands, pulling as well as we could
towards land.

What the shore was, whether rock or sand, whether steep or shoal, we knew
not.  The only hope that could rationally give us the least shadow of
expectation was, if we might find some bay or gulf, or the mouth of some
river, where by great chance we might have run our boat in, or got under
the lee of the land, and perhaps made smooth water.  But there was
nothing like this appeared; but as we made nearer and nearer the shore,
the land looked more frightful than the sea.

After we had rowed, or rather driven about a league and a half, as we
reckoned it, a raging wave, mountain-like, came rolling astern of us, and
plainly bade us expect the _coup de grace_.  It took us with such a fury,
that it overset the boat at once; and separating us as well from the boat
as from one another, gave us no time to say, "O God!" for we were all
swallowed up in a moment.

Nothing can describe the confusion of thought which I felt when I sank
into the water; for though I swam very well, yet I could not deliver
myself from the waves so as to draw breath, till that wave having driven
me, or rather carried me, a vast way on towards the shore, and having
spent itself, went back, and left me upon the land almost dry, but half
dead with the water I took in.  I had so much presence of mind, as well
as breath left, that seeing myself nearer the mainland than I expected, I
got upon my feet, and endeavoured to make on towards the land as fast as
I could before another wave should return and take me up again; but I
soon found it was impossible to avoid it; for I saw the sea come after me
as high as a great hill, and as furious as an enemy, which I had no means
or strength to contend with: my business was to hold my breath, and raise
myself upon the water if I could; and so, by swimming, to preserve my
breathing, and pilot myself towards the shore, if possible, my greatest
concern now being that the sea, as it would carry me a great way towards
the shore when it came on, might not carry me back again with it when it
gave back towards the sea.

The wave that came upon me again buried me at once twenty or thirty feet
deep in its own body, and I could feel myself carried with a mighty force
and swiftness towards the shore--a very great way; but I held my breath,
and assisted myself to swim still forward with all my might.  I was ready
to burst with holding my breath, when, as I felt myself rising up, so, to
my immediate relief, I found my head and hands shoot out above the
surface of the water; and though it was not two seconds of time that I
could keep myself so, yet it relieved me greatly, gave me breath, and new
courage.  I was covered again with water a good while, but not so long
but I held it out; and finding the water had spent itself, and began to
return, I struck forward against the return of the waves, and felt ground
again with my feet.  I stood still a few moments to recover breath, and
till the waters went from me, and then took to my heels and ran with what
strength I had further towards the shore.  But neither would this deliver
me from the fury of the sea, which came pouring in after me again; and
twice more I was lifted up by the waves and carried forward as before,
the shore being very flat.

The last time of these two had well-nigh been fatal to me, for the sea
having hurried me along as before, landed me, or rather dashed me,
against a piece of rock, and that with such force, that it left me
senseless, and indeed helpless, as to my own deliverance; for the blow
taking my side and breast, beat the breath as it were quite out of my
body; and had it returned again immediately, I must have been strangled
in the water; but I recovered a little before the return of the waves,
and seeing I should be covered again with the water, I resolved to hold
fast by a piece of the rock, and so to hold my breath, if possible, till
the wave went back.  Now, as the waves were not so high as at first,
being nearer land, I held my hold till the wave abated, and then fetched
another run, which brought me so near the shore that the next wave,
though it went over me, yet did not so swallow me up as to carry me away;
and the next run I took, I got to the mainland, where, to my great
comfort, I clambered up the cliffs of the shore and sat me down upon the
grass, free from danger and quite out of the reach of the water.

I was now landed and safe on shore, and began to look up and thank God
that my life was saved, in a case wherein there was some minutes before
scarce any room to hope.  I believe it is impossible to express, to the
life, what the ecstasies and transports of the soul are, when it is so
saved, as I may say, out of the very grave: and I do not wonder now at
the custom, when a malefactor, who has the halter about his neck, is tied
up, and just going to be turned off, and has a reprieve brought to him--I
say, I do not wonder that they bring a surgeon with it, to let him blood
that very moment they tell him of it, that the surprise may not drive the
animal spirits from the heart and overwhelm him.

    "For sudden joys, like griefs, confound at first."

I walked about on the shore lifting up my hands, and my whole being, as I
may say, wrapped up in a contemplation of my deliverance; making a
thousand gestures and motions, which I cannot describe; reflecting upon
all my comrades that were drowned, and that there should not be one soul
saved but myself; for, as for them, I never saw them afterwards, or any
sign of them, except three of their hats, one cap, and two shoes that
were not fellows.

I cast my eye to the stranded vessel, when, the breach and froth of the
sea being so big, I could hardly see it, it lay so far of; and
considered, Lord! how was it possible I could get on shore?

After I had solaced my mind with the comfortable part of my condition, I
began to look round me, to see what kind of place I was in, and what was
next to be done; and I soon found my comforts abate, and that, in a word,
I had a dreadful deliverance; for I was wet, had no clothes to shift me,
nor anything either to eat or drink to comfort me; neither did I see any
prospect before me but that of perishing with hunger or being devoured by
wild beasts; and that which was particularly afflicting to me was, that I
had no weapon, either to hunt and kill any creature for my sustenance, or
to defend myself against any other creature that might desire to kill me
for theirs.  In a word, I had nothing about me but a knife, a
tobacco-pipe, and a little tobacco in a box.  This was all my provisions;
and this threw me into such terrible agonies of mind, that for a while I
ran about like a madman.  Night coming upon me, I began with a heavy
heart to consider what would be my lot if there were any ravenous beasts
in that country, as at night they always come abroad for their prey.

All the remedy that offered to my thoughts at that time was to get up
into a thick bushy tree like a fir, but thorny, which grew near me, and
where I resolved to sit all night, and consider the next day what death I
should die, for as yet I saw no prospect of life.  I walked about a
furlong from the shore, to see if I could find any fresh water to drink,
which I did, to my great joy; and having drank, and put a little tobacco
into my mouth to prevent hunger, I went to the tree, and getting up into
it, endeavoured to place myself so that if I should sleep I might not
fall.  And having cut me a short stick, like a truncheon, for my defence,
I took up my lodging; and having been excessively fatigued, I fell fast
asleep, and slept as comfortably as, I believe, few could have done in my
condition, and found myself more refreshed with it than, I think, I ever
was on such an occasion.




CHAPTER IV--FIRST WEEKS ON THE ISLAND


When I waked it was broad day, the weather clear, and the storm abated,
so that the sea did not rage and swell as before.  But that which
surprised me most was, that the ship was lifted off in the night from the
sand where she lay by the swelling of the tide, and was driven up almost
as far as the rock which I at first mentioned, where I had been so
bruised by the wave dashing me against it.  This being within about a
mile from the shore where I was, and the ship seeming to stand upright
still, I wished myself on board, that at least I might save some
necessary things for my use.

When I came down from my apartment in the tree, I looked about me again,
and the first thing I found was the boat, which lay, as the wind and the
sea had tossed her up, upon the land, about two miles on my right hand.
I walked as far as I could upon the shore to have got to her; but found a
neck or inlet of water between me and the boat which was about half a
mile broad; so I came back for the present, being more intent upon
getting at the ship, where I hoped to find something for my present
subsistence.

A little after noon I found the sea very calm, and the tide ebbed so far
out that I could come within a quarter of a mile of the ship.  And here I
found a fresh renewing of my grief; for I saw evidently that if we had
kept on board we had been all safe--that is to say, we had all got safe
on shore, and I had not been so miserable as to be left entirety
destitute of all comfort and company as I now was.  This forced tears to
my eyes again; but as there was little relief in that, I resolved, if
possible, to get to the ship; so I pulled off my clothes--for the weather
was hot to extremity--and took the water.  But when I came to the ship my
difficulty was still greater to know how to get on board; for, as she lay
aground, and high out of the water, there was nothing within my reach to
lay hold of.  I swam round her twice, and the second time I spied a small
piece of rope, which I wondered I did not see at first, hung down by the
fore-chains so low, as that with great difficulty I got hold of it, and
by the help of that rope I got up into the forecastle of the ship.  Here
I found that the ship was bulged, and had a great deal of water in her
hold, but that she lay so on the side of a bank of hard sand, or, rather
earth, that her stern lay lifted up upon the bank, and her head low,
almost to the water.  By this means all her quarter was free, and all
that was in that part was dry; for you may be sure my first work was to
search, and to see what was spoiled and what was free.  And, first, I
found that all the ship's provisions were dry and untouched by the water,
and being very well disposed to eat, I went to the bread room and filled
my pockets with biscuit, and ate it as I went about other things, for I
had no time to lose.  I also found some rum in the great cabin, of which
I took a large dram, and which I had, indeed, need enough of to spirit me
for what was before me.  Now I wanted nothing but a boat to furnish
myself with many things which I foresaw would be very necessary to me.

It was in vain to sit still and wish for what was not to be had; and this
extremity roused my application.  We had several spare yards, and two or
three large spars of wood, and a spare topmast or two in the ship; I
resolved to fall to work with these, and I flung as many of them
overboard as I could manage for their weight, tying every one with a
rope, that they might not drive away.  When this was done I went down the
ship's side, and pulling them to me, I tied four of them together at both
ends as well as I could, in the form of a raft, and laying two or three
short pieces of plank upon them crossways, I found I could walk upon it
very well, but that it was not able to bear any great weight, the pieces
being too light.  So I went to work, and with a carpenter's saw I cut a
spare topmast into three lengths, and added them to my raft, with a great
deal of labour and pains.  But the hope of furnishing myself with
necessaries encouraged me to go beyond what I should have been able to
have done upon another occasion.

My raft was now strong enough to bear any reasonable weight.  My next
care was what to load it with, and how to preserve what I laid upon it
from the surf of the sea; but I was not long considering this.  I first
laid all the planks or boards upon it that I could get, and having
considered well what I most wanted, I got three of the seamen's chests,
which I had broken open, and emptied, and lowered them down upon my raft;
the first of these I filled with provisions--viz. bread, rice, three
Dutch cheeses, five pieces of dried goat's flesh (which we lived much
upon), and a little remainder of European corn, which had been laid by
for some fowls which we brought to sea with us, but the fowls were
killed.  There had been some barley and wheat together; but, to my great
disappointment, I found afterwards that the rats had eaten or spoiled it
all.  As for liquors, I found several, cases of bottles belonging to our
skipper, in which were some cordial waters; and, in all, about five or
six gallons of rack.  These I stowed by themselves, there being no need
to put them into the chest, nor any room for them.  While I was doing
this, I found the tide begin to flow, though very calm; and I had the
mortification to see my coat, shirt, and waistcoat, which I had left on
the shore, upon the sand, swim away.  As for my breeches, which were only
linen, and open-kneed, I swam on board in them and my stockings.
However, this set me on rummaging for clothes, of which I found enough,
but took no more than I wanted for present use, for I had others things
which my eye was more upon--as, first, tools to work with on shore.  And
it was after long searching that I found out the carpenter's chest, which
was, indeed, a very useful prize to me, and much more valuable than a
shipload of gold would have been at that time.  I got it down to my raft,
whole as it was, without losing time to look into it, for I knew in
general what it contained.

My next care was for some ammunition and arms.  There were two very good
fowling-pieces in the great cabin, and two pistols.  These I secured
first, with some powder-horns and a small bag of shot, and two old rusty
swords.  I knew there were three barrels of powder in the ship, but knew
not where our gunner had stowed them; but with much search I found them,
two of them dry and good, the third had taken water.  Those two I got to
my raft with the arms.  And now I thought myself pretty well freighted,
and began to think how I should get to shore with them, having neither
sail, oar, nor rudder; and the least capful of wind would have overset
all my navigation.

I had three encouragements--1st, a smooth, calm sea; 2ndly, the tide
rising, and setting in to the shore; 3rdly, what little wind there was
blew me towards the land.  And thus, having found two or three broken
oars belonging to the boat--and, besides the tools which were in the
chest, I found two saws, an axe, and a hammer; with this cargo I put to
sea.  For a mile or thereabouts my raft went very well, only that I found
it drive a little distant from the place where I had landed before; by
which I perceived that there was some indraft of the water, and
consequently I hoped to find some creek or river there, which I might
make use of as a port to get to land with my cargo.

As I imagined, so it was.  There appeared before me a little opening of
the land, and I found a strong current of the tide set into it; so I
guided my raft as well as I could, to keep in the middle of the stream.

But here I had like to have suffered a second shipwreck, which, if I had,
I think verily would have broken my heart; for, knowing nothing of the
coast, my raft ran aground at one end of it upon a shoal, and not being
aground at the other end, it wanted but a little that all my cargo had
slipped off towards the end that was afloat, and to fallen into the
water.  I did my utmost, by setting my back against the chests, to keep
them in their places, but could not thrust off the raft with all my
strength; neither durst I stir from the posture I was in; but holding up
the chests with all my might, I stood in that manner near half-an-hour,
in which time the rising of the water brought me a little more upon a
level; and a little after, the water still-rising, my raft floated again,
and I thrust her off with the oar I had into the channel, and then
driving up higher, I at length found myself in the mouth of a little
river, with land on both sides, and a strong current of tide running up.
I looked on both sides for a proper place to get to shore, for I was not
willing to be driven too high up the river: hoping in time to see some
ships at sea, and therefore resolved to place myself as near the coast as
I could.

At length I spied a little cove on the right shore of the creek, to which
with great pain and difficulty I guided my raft, and at last got so near
that, reaching ground with my oar, I could thrust her directly in.  But
here I had like to have dipped all my cargo into the sea again; for that
shore lying pretty steep--that is to say sloping--there was no place to
land, but where one end of my float, if it ran on shore, would lie so
high, and the other sink lower, as before, that it would endanger my
cargo again.  All that I could do was to wait till the tide was at the
highest, keeping the raft with my oar like an anchor, to hold the side of
it fast to the shore, near a flat piece of ground, which I expected the
water would flow over; and so it did.  As soon as I found water
enough--for my raft drew about a foot of water--I thrust her upon that
flat piece of ground, and there fastened or moored her, by sticking my
two broken oars into the ground, one on one side near one end, and one on
the other side near the other end; and thus I lay till the water ebbed
away, and left my raft and all my cargo safe on shore.

My next work was to view the country, and seek a proper place for my
habitation, and where to stow my goods to secure them from whatever might
happen.  Where I was, I yet knew not; whether on the continent or on an
island; whether inhabited or not inhabited; whether in danger of wild
beasts or not.  There was a hill not above a mile from me, which rose up
very steep and high, and which seemed to overtop some other hills, which
lay as in a ridge from it northward.  I took out one of the
fowling-pieces, and one of the pistols, and a horn of powder; and thus
armed, I travelled for discovery up to the top of that hill, where, after
I had with great labour and difficulty got to the top, I saw my fate, to
my great affliction--viz. that I was in an island environed every way
with the sea: no land to be seen except some rocks, which lay a great way
off; and two small islands, less than this, which lay about three leagues
to the west.

I found also that the island I was in was barren, and, as I saw good
reason to believe, uninhabited except by wild beasts, of whom, however, I
saw none.  Yet I saw abundance of fowls, but knew not their kinds;
neither when I killed them could I tell what was fit for food, and what
not.  At my coming back, I shot at a great bird which I saw sitting upon
a tree on the side of a great wood.  I believe it was the first gun that
had been fired there since the creation of the world.  I had no sooner
fired, than from all parts of the wood there arose an innumerable number
of fowls, of many sorts, making a confused screaming and crying, and
every one according to his usual note, but not one of them of any kind
that I knew.  As for the creature I killed, I took it to be a kind of
hawk, its colour and beak resembling it, but it had no talons or claws
more than common.  Its flesh was carrion, and fit for nothing.

Contented with this discovery, I came back to my raft, and fell to work
to bring my cargo on shore, which took me up the rest of that day.  What
to do with myself at night I knew not, nor indeed where to rest, for I
was afraid to lie down on the ground, not knowing but some wild beast
might devour me, though, as I afterwards found, there was really no need
for those fears.

However, as well as I could, I barricaded myself round with the chest and
boards that I had brought on shore, and made a kind of hut for that
night's lodging.  As for food, I yet saw not which way to supply myself,
except that I had seen two or three creatures like hares run out of the
wood where I shot the fowl.

I now began to consider that I might yet get a great many things out of
the ship which would be useful to me, and particularly some of the
rigging and sails, and such other things as might come to land; and I
resolved to make another voyage on board the vessel, if possible.  And as
I knew that the first storm that blew must necessarily break her all in
pieces, I resolved to set all other things apart till I had got
everything out of the ship that I could get.  Then I called a
council--that is to say in my thoughts--whether I should take back the
raft; but this appeared impracticable: so I resolved to go as before,
when the tide was down; and I did so, only that I stripped before I went
from my hut, having nothing on but my chequered shirt, a pair of linen
drawers, and a pair of pumps on my feet.

I got on board the ship as before, and prepared a second raft; and,
having had experience of the first, I neither made this so unwieldy, nor
loaded it so hard, but yet I brought away several things very useful to
me; as first, in the carpenters stores I found two or three bags full of
nails and spikes, a great screw-jack, a dozen or two of hatchets, and,
above all, that most useful thing called a grindstone.  All these I
secured, together with several things belonging to the gunner,
particularly two or three iron crows, and two barrels of musket bullets,
seven muskets, another fowling-piece, with some small quantity of powder
more; a large bagful of small shot, and a great roll of sheet-lead; but
this last was so heavy, I could not hoist it up to get it over the ship's
side.

Besides these things, I took all the men's clothes that I could find, and
a spare fore-topsail, a hammock, and some bedding; and with this I loaded
my second raft, and brought them all safe on shore, to my very great
comfort.

I was under some apprehension, during my absence from the land, that at
least my provisions might be devoured on shore: but when I came back I
found no sign of any visitor; only there sat a creature like a wild cat
upon one of the chests, which, when I came towards it, ran away a little
distance, and then stood still.  She sat very composed and unconcerned,
and looked full in my face, as if she had a mind to be acquainted with
me.  I presented my gun at her, but, as she did not understand it, she
was perfectly unconcerned at it, nor did she offer to stir away; upon
which I tossed her a bit of biscuit, though by the way, I was not very
free of it, for my store was not great: however, I spared her a bit, I
say, and she went to it, smelled at it, and ate it, and looked (as if
pleased) for more; but I thanked her, and could spare no more: so she
marched off.

Having got my second cargo on shore--though I was fain to open the
barrels of powder, and bring them by parcels, for they were too heavy,
being large casks--I went to work to make me a little tent with the sail
and some poles which I cut for that purpose: and into this tent I brought
everything that I knew would spoil either with rain or sun; and I piled
all the empty chests and casks up in a circle round the tent, to fortify
it from any sudden attempt, either from man or beast.

When I had done this, I blocked up the door of the tent with some boards
within, and an empty chest set up on end without; and spreading one of
the beds upon the ground, laying my two pistols just at my head, and my
gun at length by me, I went to bed for the first time, and slept very
quietly all night, for I was very weary and heavy; for the night before I
had slept little, and had laboured very hard all day to fetch all those
things from the ship, and to get them on shore.

I had the biggest magazine of all kinds now that ever was laid up, I
believe, for one man: but I was not satisfied still, for while the ship
sat upright in that posture, I thought I ought to get everything out of
her that I could; so every day at low water I went on board, and brought
away something or other; but particularly the third time I went I brought
away as much of the rigging as I could, as also all the small ropes and
rope-twine I could get, with a piece of spare canvas, which was to mend
the sails upon occasion, and the barrel of wet gunpowder.  In a word, I
brought away all the sails, first and last; only that I was fain to cut
them in pieces, and bring as much at a time as I could, for they were no
more useful to be sails, but as mere canvas only.

But that which comforted me more still, was, that last of all, after I
had made five or six such voyages as these, and thought I had nothing
more to expect from the ship that was worth my meddling with--I say,
after all this, I found a great hogshead of bread, three large runlets of
rum, or spirits, a box of sugar, and a barrel of fine flour; this was
surprising to me, because I had given over expecting any more provisions,
except what was spoiled by the water.  I soon emptied the hogshead of the
bread, and wrapped it up, parcel by parcel, in pieces of the sails, which
I cut out; and, in a word, I got all this safe on shore also.

The next day I made another voyage, and now, having plundered the ship of
what was portable and fit to hand out, I began with the cables.  Cutting
the great cable into pieces, such as I could move, I got two cables and a
hawser on shore, with all the ironwork I could get; and having cut down
the spritsail-yard, and the mizzen-yard, and everything I could, to make
a large raft, I loaded it with all these heavy goods, and came away.  But
my good luck began now to leave me; for this raft was so unwieldy, and so
overladen, that, after I had entered the little cove where I had landed
the rest of my goods, not being able to guide it so handily as I did the
other, it overset, and threw me and all my cargo into the water.  As for
myself, it was no great harm, for I was near the shore; but as to my
cargo, it was a great part of it lost, especially the iron, which I
expected would have been of great use to me; however, when the tide was
out, I got most of the pieces of the cable ashore, and some of the iron,
though with infinite labour; for I was fain to dip for it into the water,
a work which fatigued me very much.  After this, I went every day on
board, and brought away what I could get.

I had been now thirteen days on shore, and had been eleven times on board
the ship, in which time I had brought away all that one pair of hands
could well be supposed capable to bring; though I believe verily, had the
calm weather held, I should have brought away the whole ship, piece by
piece.  But preparing the twelfth time to go on board, I found the wind
began to rise: however, at low water I went on board, and though I
thought I had rummaged the cabin so effectually that nothing more could
be found, yet I discovered a locker with drawers in it, in one of which I
found two or three razors, and one pair of large scissors, with some ten
or a dozen of good knives and forks: in another I found about thirty-six
pounds value in money--some European coin, some Brazil, some pieces of
eight, some gold, and some silver.

I smiled to myself at the sight of this money: "O drug!" said I, aloud,
"what art thou good for?  Thou art not worth to me--no, not the taking
off the ground; one of those knives is worth all this heap; I have no
manner of use for thee--e'en remain where thou art, and go to the bottom
as a creature whose life is not worth saying."  However, upon second
thoughts I took it away; and wrapping all this in a piece of canvas, I
began to think of making another raft; but while I was preparing this, I
found the sky overcast, and the wind began to rise, and in a quarter of
an hour it blew a fresh gale from the shore.  It presently occurred to me
that it was in vain to pretend to make a raft with the wind offshore; and
that it was my business to be gone before the tide of flood began,
otherwise I might not be able to reach the shore at all.  Accordingly, I
let myself down into the water, and swam across the channel, which lay
between the ship and the sands, and even that with difficulty enough,
partly with the weight of the things I had about me, and partly the
roughness of the water; for the wind rose very hastily, and before it was
quite high water it blew a storm.

But I had got home to my little tent, where I lay, with all my wealth
about me, very secure.  It blew very hard all night, and in the morning,
when I looked out, behold, no more ship was to be seen!  I was a little
surprised, but recovered myself with the satisfactory reflection that I
had lost no time, nor abated any diligence, to get everything out of her
that could be useful to me; and that, indeed, there was little left in
her that I was able to bring away, if I had had more time.

I now gave over any more thoughts of the ship, or of anything out of her,
except what might drive on shore from her wreck; as, indeed, divers
pieces of her afterwards did; but those things were of small use to me.

My thoughts were now wholly employed about securing myself against either
savages, if any should appear, or wild beasts, if any were in the island;
and I had many thoughts of the method how to do this, and what kind of
dwelling to make--whether I should make me a cave in the earth, or a tent
upon the earth; and, in short, I resolved upon both; the manner and
description of which, it may not be improper to give an account of.

I soon found the place I was in was not fit for my settlement, because it
was upon a low, moorish ground, near the sea, and I believed it would not
be wholesome, and more particularly because there was no fresh water near
it; so I resolved to find a more healthy and more convenient spot of
ground.

I consulted several things in my situation, which I found would he proper
for me: 1st, health and fresh water, I just now mentioned; 2ndly, shelter
from the heat of the sun; 3rdly, security from ravenous creatures,
whether man or beast; 4thly, a view to the sea, that if God sent any ship
in sight, I might not lose any advantage for my deliverance, of which I
was not willing to banish all my expectation yet.

In search of a place proper for this, I found a little plain on the side
of a rising hill, whose front towards this little plain was steep as a
house-side, so that nothing could come down upon me from the top.  On the
one side of the rock there was a hollow place, worn a little way in, like
the entrance or door of a cave but there was not really any cave or way
into the rock at all.

On the flat of the green, just before this hollow place, I resolved to
pitch my tent.  This plain was not above a hundred yards broad, and about
twice as long, and lay like a green before my door; and, at the end of
it, descended irregularly every way down into the low ground by the
seaside.  It was on the N.N.W. side of the hill; so that it was sheltered
from the heat every day, till it came to a W. and by S. sun, or
thereabouts, which, in those countries, is near the setting.

Before I set up my tent I drew a half-circle before the hollow place,
which took in about ten yards in its semi-diameter from the rock, and
twenty yards in its diameter from its beginning and ending.

In this half-circle I pitched two rows of strong stakes, driving them
into the ground till they stood very firm like piles, the biggest end
being out of the ground above five feet and a half, and sharpened on the
top.  The two rows did not stand above six inches from one another.

Then I took the pieces of cable which I had cut in the ship, and laid
them in rows, one upon another, within the circle, between these two rows
of stakes, up to the top, placing other stakes in the inside, leaning
against them, about two feet and a half high, like a spur to a post; and
this fence was so strong, that neither man nor beast could get into it or
over it.  This cost me a great deal of time and labour, especially to cut
the piles in the woods, bring them to the place, and drive them into the
earth.

The entrance into this place I made to be, not by a door, but by a short
ladder to go over the top; which ladder, when I was in, I lifted over
after me; and so I was completely fenced in and fortified, as I thought,
from all the world, and consequently slept secure in the night, which
otherwise I could not have done; though, as it appeared afterwards, there
was no need of all this caution from the enemies that I apprehended
danger from.

Into this fence or fortress, with infinite labour, I carried all my
riches, all my provisions, ammunition, and stores, of which you have the
account above; and I made a large tent, which to preserve me from the
rains that in one part of the year are very violent there, I made
double--one smaller tent within, and one larger tent above it; and
covered the uppermost with a large tarpaulin, which I had saved among the
sails.

And now I lay no more for a while in the bed which I had brought on
shore, but in a hammock, which was indeed a very good one, and belonged
to the mate of the ship.

Into this tent I brought all my provisions, and everything that would
spoil by the wet; and having thus enclosed all my goods, I made up the
entrance, which till now I had left open, and so passed and repassed, as
I said, by a short ladder.

When I had done this, I began to work my way into the rock, and bringing
all the earth and stones that I dug down out through my tent, I laid them
up within my fence, in the nature of a terrace, so that it raised the
ground within about a foot and a half; and thus I made me a cave, just
behind my tent, which served me like a cellar to my house.

It cost me much labour and many days before all these things were brought
to perfection; and therefore I must go back to some other things which
took up some of my thoughts.  At the same time it happened, after I had
laid my scheme for the setting up my tent, and making the cave, that a
storm of rain falling from a thick, dark cloud, a sudden flash of
lightning happened, and after that a great clap of thunder, as is
naturally the effect of it.  I was not so much surprised with the
lightning as I was with the thought which darted into my mind as swift as
the lightning itself--Oh, my powder!  My very heart sank within me when I
thought that, at one blast, all my powder might be destroyed; on which,
not my defence only, but the providing my food, as I thought, entirely
depended.  I was nothing near so anxious about my own danger, though, had
the powder took fire, I should never have known who had hurt me.

Such impression did this make upon me, that after the storm was over I
laid aside all my works, my building and fortifying, and applied myself
to make bags and boxes, to separate the powder, and to keep it a little
and a little in a parcel, in the hope that, whatever might come, it might
not all take fire at once; and to keep it so apart that it should not be
possible to make one part fire another.  I finished this work in about a
fortnight; and I think my powder, which in all was about two hundred and
forty pounds weight, was divided in not less than a hundred parcels.  As
to the barrel that had been wet, I did not apprehend any danger from
that; so I placed it in my new cave, which, in my fancy, I called my
kitchen; and the rest I hid up and down in holes among the rocks, so that
no wet might come to it, marking very carefully where I laid it.

In the interval of time while this was doing, I went out once at least
every day with my gun, as well to divert myself as to see if I could kill
anything fit for food; and, as near as I could, to acquaint myself with
what the island produced.  The first time I went out, I presently
discovered that there were goats in the island, which was a great
satisfaction to me; but then it was attended with this misfortune to
me--viz. that they were so shy, so subtle, and so swift of foot, that it
was the most difficult thing in the world to come at them; but I was not
discouraged at this, not doubting but I might now and then shoot one, as
it soon happened; for after I had found their haunts a little, I laid
wait in this manner for them: I observed if they saw me in the valleys,
though they were upon the rocks, they would run away, as in a terrible
fright; but if they were feeding in the valleys, and I was upon the
rocks, they took no notice of me; from whence I concluded that, by the
position of their optics, their sight was so directed downward that they
did not readily see objects that were above them; so afterwards I took
this method--I always climbed the rocks first, to get above them, and
then had frequently a fair mark.

The first shot I made among these creatures, I killed a she-goat, which
had a little kid by her, which she gave suck to, which grieved me
heartily; for when the old one fell, the kid stood stock still by her,
till I came and took her up; and not only so, but when I carried the old
one with me, upon my shoulders, the kid followed me quite to my
enclosure; upon which I laid down the dam, and took the kid in my arms,
and carried it over my pale, in hopes to have bred it up tame; but it
would not eat; so I was forced to kill it and eat it myself.  These two
supplied me with flesh a great while, for I ate sparingly, and saved my
provisions, my bread especially, as much as possibly I could.

Having now fixed my habitation, I found it absolutely necessary to
provide a place to make a fire in, and fuel to burn: and what I did for
that, and also how I enlarged my cave, and what conveniences I made, I
shall give a full account of in its place; but I must now give some
little account of myself, and of my thoughts about living, which, it may
well be supposed, were not a few.

I had a dismal prospect of my condition; for as I was not cast away upon
that island without being driven, as is said, by a violent storm, quite
out of the course of our intended voyage, and a great way, viz. some
hundreds of leagues, out of the ordinary course of the trade of mankind,
I had great reason to consider it as a determination of Heaven, that in
this desolate place, and in this desolate manner, I should end my life.
The tears would run plentifully down my face when I made these
reflections; and sometimes I would expostulate with myself why Providence
should thus completely ruin His creatures, and render them so absolutely
miserable; so without help, abandoned, so entirely depressed, that it
could hardly be rational to be thankful for such a life.

But something always returned swift upon me to check these thoughts, and
to reprove me; and particularly one day, walking with my gun in my hand
by the seaside, I was very pensive upon the subject of my present
condition, when reason, as it were, expostulated with me the other way,
thus: "Well, you are in a desolate condition, it is true; but, pray
remember, where are the rest of you?  Did not you come, eleven of you in
the boat?  Where are the ten?  Why were they not saved, and you lost?
Why were you singled out?  Is it better to be here or there?"  And then I
pointed to the sea.  All evils are to be considered with the good that is
in them, and with what worse attends them.

Then it occurred to me again, how well I was furnished for my
subsistence, and what would have been my case if it had not happened
(which was a hundred thousand to one) that the ship floated from the
place where she first struck, and was driven so near to the shore that I
had time to get all these things out of her; what would have been my
case, if I had been forced to have lived in the condition in which I at
first came on shore, without necessaries of life, or necessaries to
supply and procure them?  "Particularly," said I, aloud (though to
myself), "what should I have done without a gun, without ammunition,
without any tools to make anything, or to work with, without clothes,
bedding, a tent, or any manner of covering?" and that now I had all these
to sufficient quantity, and was in a fair way to provide myself in such a
manner as to live without my gun, when my ammunition was spent: so that I
had a tolerable view of subsisting, without any want, as long as I lived;
for I considered from the beginning how I would provide for the accidents
that might happen, and for the time that was to come, even not only after
my ammunition should be spent, but even after my health and strength
should decay.

I confess I had not entertained any notion of my ammunition being
destroyed at one blast--I mean my powder being blown up by lightning; and
this made the thoughts of it so surprising to me, when it lightened and
thundered, as I observed just now.

And now being about to enter into a melancholy relation of a scene of
silent life, such, perhaps, as was never heard of in the world before, I
shall take it from its beginning, and continue it in its order.  It was
by my account the 30th of September, when, in the manner as above said, I
first set foot upon this horrid island; when the sun, being to us in its
autumnal equinox, was almost over my head; for I reckoned myself, by
observation, to be in the latitude of nine degrees twenty-two minutes
north of the line.

After I had been there about ten or twelve days, it came into my thoughts
that I should lose my reckoning of time for want of books, and pen and
ink, and should even forget the Sabbath days; but to prevent this, I cut
with my knife upon a large post, in capital letters--and making it into a
great cross, I set it up on the shore where I first landed--"I came on
shore here on the 30th September 1659."

Upon the sides of this square post I cut every day a notch with my knife,
and every seventh notch was as long again as the rest, and every first
day of the month as long again as that long one; and thus I kept my
calendar, or weekly, monthly, and yearly reckoning of time.

In the next place, we are to observe that among the many things which I
brought out of the ship, in the several voyages which, as above
mentioned, I made to it, I got several things of less value, but not at
all less useful to me, which I omitted setting down before; as, in
particular, pens, ink, and paper, several parcels in the captain's,
mate's, gunner's and carpenter's keeping; three or four compasses, some
mathematical instruments, dials, perspectives, charts, and books of
navigation, all which I huddled together, whether I might want them or
no; also, I found three very good Bibles, which came to me in my cargo
from England, and which I had packed up among my things; some Portuguese
books also; and among them two or three Popish prayer-books, and several
other books, all which I carefully secured.  And I must not forget that
we had in the ship a dog and two cats, of whose eminent history I may
have occasion to say something in its place; for I carried both the cats
with me; and as for the dog, he jumped out of the ship of himself, and
swam on shore to me the day after I went on shore with my first cargo,
and was a trusty servant to me many years; I wanted nothing that he could
fetch me, nor any company that he could make up to me; I only wanted to
have him talk to me, but that would not do.  As I observed before, I
found pens, ink, and paper, and I husbanded them to the utmost; and I
shall show that while my ink lasted, I kept things very exact, but after
that was gone I could not, for I could not make any ink by any means that
I could devise.

And this put me in mind that I wanted many things notwithstanding all
that I had amassed together; and of these, ink was one; as also a spade,
pickaxe, and shovel, to dig or remove the earth; needles, pins, and
thread; as for linen, I soon learned to want that without much
difficulty.

This want of tools made every work I did go on heavily; and it was near a
whole year before I had entirely finished my little pale, or surrounded
my habitation.  The piles, or stakes, which were as heavy as I could well
lift, were a long time in cutting and preparing in the woods, and more,
by far, in bringing home; so that I spent sometimes two days in cutting
and bringing home one of those posts, and a third day in driving it into
the ground; for which purpose I got a heavy piece of wood at first, but
at last bethought myself of one of the iron crows; which, however, though
I found it, made driving those posts or piles very laborious and tedious
work.

But what need I have been concerned at the tediousness of anything
I had to do, seeing I had time enough to do it in? nor had I any other
employment, if that had been over, at least that I could foresee, except
the ranging the island to seek for food, which I did, more or less, every
day.

I now began to consider seriously my condition, and the circumstances I
was reduced to; and I drew up the state of my affairs in writing, not so
much to leave them to any that were to come after me--for I was likely to
have but few heirs--as to deliver my thoughts from daily poring over
them, and afflicting my mind; and as my reason began now to master my
despondency, I began to comfort myself as well as I could, and to set the
good against the evil, that I might have something to distinguish my case
from worse; and I stated very impartially, like debtor and creditor, the
comforts I enjoyed against the miseries I suffered, thus:--

             _Evil_.                             _Good_.
I am cast upon a horrible,          But I am alive; and not drowned,
desolate island, void of all hope   as all my ship's company were.
of recovery.
I am singled out and separated,     But I am singled out, too, from
as it were, from all the world,     all the ship's crew, to be spared
to be miserable.                    from death; and He that
                                    miraculously saved me from death
                                    can deliver me from this
                                    condition.


I am divided from mankind--a        But I am not starved, and
solitaire; one banished from        perishing on a barren place,
human society.                      affording no sustenance.
I have no clothes to cover me.      But I am in a hot climate, where,
                                    if I had clothes, I could hardly
                                    wear them.
I am without any defence, or        But I am cast on an island where
means to resist any violence of     I see no wild beasts to hurt me,
man or beast.                       as I saw on the coast of Africa;
                                    and what if I had been
                                    shipwrecked there?


I have no soul to speak to or       But God wonderfully sent the ship
relieve me.                         in near enough to the shore, that
                                    I have got out as many necessary
                                    things as will either supply my
                                    wants or enable me to supply
                                    myself, even as long as I live.



Upon the whole, here was an undoubted testimony that there was scarce any
condition in the world so miserable but there was something negative or
something positive to be thankful for in it; and let this stand as a
direction from the experience of the most miserable of all conditions in
this world: that we may always find in it something to comfort ourselves
from, and to set, in the description of good and evil, on the credit side
of the account.

Having now brought my mind a little to relish my condition, and given
over looking out to sea, to see if I could spy a ship--I say, giving over
these things, I began to apply myself to arrange my way of living, and to
make things as easy to me as I could.

I have already described my habitation, which was a tent under the side
of a rock, surrounded with a strong pale of posts and cables: but I might
now rather call it a wall, for I raised a kind of wall up against it of
turfs, about two feet thick on the outside; and after some time (I think
it was a year and a half) I raised rafters from it, leaning to the rock,
and thatched or covered it with boughs of trees, and such things as I
could get, to keep out the rain; which I found at some times of the year
very violent.

I have already observed how I brought all my goods into this pale, and
into the cave which I had made behind me.  But I must observe, too, that
at first this was a confused heap of goods, which, as they lay in no
order, so they took up all my place; I had no room to turn myself: so I
set myself to enlarge my cave, and work farther into the earth; for it
was a loose sandy rock, which yielded easily to the labour I bestowed on
it: and so when I found I was pretty safe as to beasts of prey, I worked
sideways, to the right hand, into the rock; and then, turning to the
right again, worked quite out, and made me a door to come out on the
outside of my pale or fortification.  This gave me not only egress and
regress, as it was a back way to my tent and to my storehouse, but gave
me room to store my goods.

And now I began to apply myself to make such necessary things as I found
I most wanted, particularly a chair and a table; for without these I was
not able to enjoy the few comforts I had in the world; I could not write
or eat, or do several things, with so much pleasure without a table: so I
went to work.  And here I must needs observe, that as reason is the
substance and origin of the mathematics, so by stating and squaring
everything by reason, and by making the most rational judgment of things,
every man may be, in time, master of every mechanic art.  I had never
handled a tool in my life; and yet, in time, by labour, application, and
contrivance, I found at last that I wanted nothing but I could have made
it, especially if I had had tools.  However, I made abundance of things,
even without tools; and some with no more tools than an adze and a
hatchet, which perhaps were never made that way before, and that with
infinite labour.  For example, if I wanted a board, I had no other way
but to cut down a tree, set it on an edge before me, and hew it flat on
either side with my axe, till I brought it to be thin as a plank, and
then dub it smooth with my adze.  It is true, by this method I could make
but one board out of a whole tree; but this I had no remedy for but
patience, any more than I had for the prodigious deal of time and labour
which it took me up to make a plank or board: but my time or labour was
little worth, and so it was as well employed one way as another.

However, I made me a table and a chair, as I observed above, in the first
place; and this I did out of the short pieces of boards that I brought on
my raft from the ship.  But when I had wrought out some boards as above,
I made large shelves, of the breadth of a foot and a half, one over
another all along one side of my cave, to lay all my tools, nails and
ironwork on; and, in a word, to separate everything at large into their
places, that I might come easily at them.  I knocked pieces into the wall
of the rock to hang my guns and all things that would hang up; so that,
had my cave been to be seen, it looked like a general magazine of all
necessary things; and had everything so ready at my hand, that it was a
great pleasure to me to see all my goods in such order, and especially to
find my stock of all necessaries so great.

And now it was that I began to keep a journal of every day's employment;
for, indeed, at first I was in too much hurry, and not only hurry as to
labour, but in too much discomposure of mind; and my journal would have
been full of many dull things; for example, I must have said thus:
"30_th_.--After I had got to shore, and escaped drowning, instead of
being thankful to God for my deliverance, having first vomited, with the
great quantity of salt water which had got into my stomach, and
recovering myself a little, I ran about the shore wringing my hands and
beating my head and face, exclaiming at my misery, and crying out, 'I was
undone, undone!' till, tired and faint, I was forced to lie down on the
ground to repose, but durst not sleep for fear of being devoured."

Some days after this, and after I had been on board the ship, and got all
that I could out of her, yet I could not forbear getting up to the top of
a little mountain and looking out to sea, in hopes of seeing a ship; then
fancy at a vast distance I spied a sail, please myself with the hopes of
it, and then after looking steadily, till I was almost blind, lose it
quite, and sit down and weep like a child, and thus increase my misery by
my folly.

But having gotten over these things in some measure, and having settled
my household staff and habitation, made me a table and a chair, and all
as handsome about me as I could, I began to keep my journal; of which I
shall here give you the copy (though in it will be told all these
particulars over again) as long as it lasted; for having no more ink, I
was forced to leave it off.




CHAPTER V--BUILDS A HOUSE--THE JOURNAL


September 30, 1659.--I, poor miserable Robinson Crusoe, being shipwrecked
during a dreadful storm in the offing, came on shore on this dismal,
unfortunate island, which I called "The Island of Despair"; all the rest
of the ship's company being drowned, and myself almost dead.

All the rest of the day I spent in afflicting myself at the dismal
circumstances I was brought to--viz. I had neither food, house, clothes,
weapon, nor place to fly to; and in despair of any relief, saw nothing
but death before me--either that I should be devoured by wild beasts,
murdered by savages, or starved to death for want of food.  At the
approach of night I slept in a tree, for fear of wild creatures; but
slept soundly, though it rained all night.

_October_ 1.--In the morning I saw, to my great surprise, the ship had
floated with the high tide, and was driven on shore again much nearer the
island; which, as it was some comfort, on one hand--for, seeing her set
upright, and not broken to pieces, I hoped, if the wind abated, I might
get on board, and get some food and necessaries out of her for my
relief--so, on the other hand, it renewed my grief at the loss of my
comrades, who, I imagined, if we had all stayed on board, might have
saved the ship, or, at least, that they would not have been all drowned
as they were; and that, had the men been saved, we might perhaps have
built us a boat out of the ruins of the ship to have carried us to some
other part of the world.  I spent great part of this day in perplexing
myself on these things; but at length, seeing the ship almost dry, I went
upon the sand as near as I could, and then swam on board.  This day also
it continued raining, though with no wind at all.

_From the 1st of October to the 24th_.--All these days entirely spent in
many several voyages to get all I could out of the ship, which I brought
on shore every tide of flood upon rafts.  Much rain also in the days,
though with some intervals of fair weather; but it seems this was the
rainy season.

_Oct._ 20.--I overset my raft, and all the goods I had got upon it; but,
being in shoal water, and the things being chiefly heavy, I recovered
many of them when the tide was out.

_Oct._ 25.--It rained all night and all day, with some gusts of wind;
during which time the ship broke in pieces, the wind blowing a little
harder than before, and was no more to be seen, except the wreck of her,
and that only at low water.  I spent this day in covering and securing
the goods which I had saved, that the rain might not spoil them.

_Oct._ 26.--I walked about the shore almost all day, to find out a place
to fix my habitation, greatly concerned to secure myself from any attack
in the night, either from wild beasts or men.  Towards night, I fixed
upon a proper place, under a rock, and marked out a semicircle for my
encampment; which I resolved to strengthen with a work, wall, or
fortification, made of double piles, lined within with cables, and
without with turf.

From the 26th to the 30th I worked very hard in carrying all my goods to
my new habitation, though some part of the time it rained exceedingly
hard.

The 31st, in the morning, I went out into the island with my gun, to seek
for some food, and discover the country; when I killed a she-goat, and
her kid followed me home, which I afterwards killed also, because it
would not feed.

_November_ 1.--I set up my tent under a rock, and lay there for the first
night; making it as large as I could, with stakes driven in to swing my
hammock upon.

_Nov._ 2.--I set up all my chests and boards, and the pieces of timber
which made my rafts, and with them formed a fence round me, a little
within the place I had marked out for my fortification.

_Nov._ 3.--I went out with my gun, and killed two fowls like ducks, which
were very good food.  In the afternoon went to work to make me a table.

_Nov_. 4.--This morning I began to order my times of work, of going out
with my gun, time of sleep, and time of diversion--viz. every morning I
walked out with my gun for two or three hours, if it did not rain; then
employed myself to work till about eleven o'clock; then eat what I had to
live on; and from twelve to two I lay down to sleep, the weather being
excessively hot; and then, in the evening, to work again.  The working
part of this day and of the next were wholly employed in making my table,
for I was yet but a very sorry workman, though time and necessity made me
a complete natural mechanic soon after, as I believe they would do any
one else.

_Nov._ 5.--This day went abroad with my gun and my dog, and killed a wild
cat; her skin pretty soft, but her flesh good for nothing; every creature
that I killed I took of the skins and preserved them.  Coming back by the
sea-shore, I saw many sorts of sea-fowls, which I did not understand; but
was surprised, and almost frightened, with two or three seals, which,
while I was gazing at, not well knowing what they were, got into the sea,
and escaped me for that time.

_Nov._ 6.--After my morning walk I went to work with my table again, and
finished it, though not to my liking; nor was it long before I learned to
mend it.

_Nov._ 7.--Now it began to be settled fair weather.  The 7th, 8th, 9th,
10th, and part of the 12th (for the 11th was Sunday) I took wholly up to
make me a chair, and with much ado brought it to a tolerable shape, but
never to please me; and even in the making I pulled it in pieces several
times.

_Note_.--I soon neglected my keeping Sundays; for, omitting my mark for
them on my post, I forgot which was which.

_Nov._ 13.--This day it rained, which refreshed me exceedingly, and
cooled the earth; but it was accompanied with terrible thunder and
lightning, which frightened me dreadfully, for fear of my powder.  As
soon as it was over, I resolved to separate my stock of powder into as
many little parcels as possible, that it might not be in danger.

_Nov._ 14, 15, 16.--These three days I spent in making little square
chests, or boxes, which might hold about a pound, or two pounds at most,
of powder; and so, putting the powder in, I stowed it in places as secure
and remote from one another as possible.  On one of these three days I
killed a large bird that was good to eat, but I knew not what to call it.

_Nov._ 17.--This day I began to dig behind my tent into the rock, to make
room for my further conveniency.

_Note_.--Three things I wanted exceedingly for this work--viz. a pickaxe,
a shovel, and a wheelbarrow or basket; so I desisted from my work, and
began to consider how to supply that want, and make me some tools.  As
for the pickaxe, I made use of the iron crows, which were proper enough,
though heavy; but the next thing was a shovel or spade; this was so
absolutely necessary, that, indeed, I could do nothing effectually
without it; but what kind of one to make I knew not.

_Nov._ 18.--The next day, in searching the woods, I found a tree of that
wood, or like it, which in the Brazils they call the iron-tree, for its
exceeding hardness.  Of this, with great labour, and almost spoiling my
axe, I cut a piece, and brought it home, too, with difficulty enough, for
it was exceeding heavy.  The excessive hardness of the wood, and my
having no other way, made me a long while upon this machine, for I worked
it effectually by little and little into the form of a shovel or spade;
the handle exactly shaped like ours in England, only that the board part
having no iron shod upon it at bottom, it would not last me so long;
however, it served well enough for the uses which I had occasion to put
it to; but never was a shovel, I believe, made after that fashion, or so
long in making.

I was still deficient, for I wanted a basket or a wheelbarrow.  A basket
I could not make by any means, having no such things as twigs that would
bend to make wicker-ware--at least, none yet found out; and as to a
wheelbarrow, I fancied I could make all but the wheel; but that I had no
notion of; neither did I know how to go about it; besides, I had no
possible way to make the iron gudgeons for the spindle or axis of the
wheel to run in; so I gave it over, and so, for carrying away the earth
which I dug out of the cave, I made me a thing like a hod which the
labourers carry mortar in when they serve the bricklayers.  This was not
so difficult to me as the making the shovel: and yet this and the shovel,
and the attempt which I made in vain to make a wheelbarrow, took me up no
less than four days--I mean always excepting my morning walk with my gun,
which I seldom failed, and very seldom failed also bringing home
something fit to eat.

_Nov._ 23.--My other work having now stood still, because of my making
these tools, when they were finished I went on, and working every day, as
my strength and time allowed, I spent eighteen days entirely in widening
and deepening my cave, that it might hold my goods commodiously.

_Note_.--During all this time I worked to make this room or cave spacious
enough to accommodate me as a warehouse or magazine, a kitchen, a
dining-room, and a cellar.  As for my lodging, I kept to the tent; except
that sometimes, in the wet season of the year, it rained so hard that I
could not keep myself dry, which caused me afterwards to cover all my
place within my pale with long poles, in the form of rafters, leaning
against the rock, and load them with flags and large leaves of trees,
like a thatch.

_December_ 10.--I began now to think my cave or vault finished, when on a
sudden (it seems I had made it too large) a great quantity of earth fell
down from the top on one side; so much that, in short, it frighted me,
and not without reason, too, for if I had been under it, I had never
wanted a gravedigger.  I had now a great deal of work to do over again,
for I had the loose earth to carry out; and, which was of more
importance, I had the ceiling to prop up, so that I might be sure no more
would come down.

_Dec_. 11.--This day I went to work with it accordingly, and got two
shores or posts pitched upright to the top, with two pieces of boards
across over each post; this I finished the next day; and setting more
posts up with boards, in about a week more I had the roof secured, and
the posts, standing in rows, served me for partitions to part off the
house.

_Dec._ 17.--From this day to the 20th I placed shelves, and knocked up
nails on the posts, to hang everything up that could be hung up; and now
I began to be in some order within doors.

_Dec._ 20.--Now I carried everything into the cave, and began to furnish
my house, and set up some pieces of boards like a dresser, to order my
victuals upon; but boards began to be very scarce with me; also, I made
me another table.

_Dec._ 24.--Much rain all night and all day.  No stirring out.

_Dec._ 25.--Rain all day.

_Dec._ 26.--No rain, and the earth much cooler than before, and
pleasanter.

_Dec._ 27.--Killed a young goat, and lamed another, so that I caught it
and led it home in a string; when I had it at home, I bound and
splintered up its leg, which was broke.

_N.B._--I took such care of it that it lived, and the leg grew well and
as strong as ever; but, by my nursing it so long, it grew tame, and fed
upon the little green at my door, and would not go away.  This was the
first time that I entertained a thought of breeding up some tame
creatures, that I might have food when my powder and shot was all spent.

_Dec._ 28,29,30.--Great heats and no breeze, so that there was no
stirring abroad, except in the evening for food; this time I spent in
putting all my things in order within doors.

_January_ 1.--Very hot still: but I went abroad early and late with my
gun, and lay still in the middle of the day.  This evening, going farther
into the valleys which lay towards the centre of the island, I found
there were plenty of goats, though exceedingly shy, and hard to come at;
however, I resolved to try if I could not bring my dog to hunt them down.

_Jan._ 2.--Accordingly, the next day I went out with my dog, and set him
upon the goats, but I was mistaken, for they all faced about upon the
dog, and he knew his danger too well, for he would not come near them.

_Jan._ 3.--I began my fence or wall; which, being still jealous of my
being attacked by somebody, I resolved to make very thick and strong.

_N.B._--This wall being described before, I purposely omit what was said
in the journal; it is sufficient to observe, that I was no less time than
from the 2nd of January to the 14th of April working, finishing, and
perfecting this wall, though it was no more than about twenty-four yards
in length, being a half-circle from one place in the rock to another
place, about eight yards from it, the door of the cave being in the
centre behind it.

All this time I worked very hard, the rains hindering me many days, nay,
sometimes weeks together; but I thought I should never be perfectly
secure till this wall was finished; and it is scarce credible what
inexpressible labour everything was done with, especially the bringing
piles out of the woods and driving them into the ground; for I made them
much bigger than I needed to have done.

When this wall was finished, and the outside double fenced, with a turf
wall raised up close to it, I perceived myself that if any people were to
come on shore there, they would not perceive anything like a habitation;
and it was very well I did so, as may be observed hereafter, upon a very
remarkable occasion.

During this time I made my rounds in the woods for game every day when
the rain permitted me, and made frequent discoveries in these walks of
something or other to my advantage; particularly, I found a kind of wild
pigeons, which build, not as wood-pigeons in a tree, but rather as
house-pigeons, in the holes of the rocks; and taking some young ones, I
endeavoured to breed them up tame, and did so; but when they grew older
they flew away, which perhaps was at first for want of feeding them, for
I had nothing to give them; however, I frequently found their nests, and
got their young ones, which were very good meat.  And now, in the
managing my household affairs, I found myself wanting in many things,
which I thought at first it was impossible for me to make; as, indeed,
with some of them it was: for instance, I could never make a cask to be
hooped.  I had a small runlet or two, as I observed before; but I could
never arrive at the capacity of making one by them, though I spent many
weeks about it; I could neither put in the heads, or join the staves so
true to one another as to make them hold water; so I gave that also over.
In the next place, I was at a great loss for candles; so that as soon as
ever it was dark, which was generally by seven o'clock, I was obliged to
go to bed.  I remembered the lump of beeswax with which I made candles in
my African adventure; but I had none of that now; the only remedy I had
was, that when I had killed a goat I saved the tallow, and with a little
dish made of clay, which I baked in the sun, to which I added a wick of
some oakum, I made me a lamp; and this gave me light, though not a clear,
steady light, like a candle.  In the middle of all my labours it happened
that, rummaging my things, I found a little bag which, as I hinted
before, had been filled with corn for the feeding of poultry--not for
this voyage, but before, as I suppose, when the ship came from Lisbon.
The little remainder of corn that had been in the bag was all devoured by
the rats, and I saw nothing in the bag but husks and dust; and being
willing to have the bag for some other use (I think it was to put powder
in, when I divided it for fear of the lightning, or some such use), I
shook the husks of corn out of it on one side of my fortification, under
the rock.

It was a little before the great rains just now mentioned that I threw
this stuff away, taking no notice, and not so much as remembering that I
had thrown anything there, when, about a month after, or thereabouts, I
saw some few stalks of something green shooting out of the ground, which
I fancied might be some plant I had not seen; but I was surprised, and
perfectly astonished, when, after a little longer time, I saw about ten
or twelve ears come out, which were perfect green barley, of the same
kind as our European--nay, as our English barley.

It is impossible to express the astonishment and confusion of my thoughts
on this occasion.  I had hitherto acted upon no religious foundation at
all; indeed, I had very few notions of religion in my head, nor had
entertained any sense of anything that had befallen me otherwise than as
chance, or, as we lightly say, what pleases God, without so much as
inquiring into the end of Providence in these things, or His order in
governing events for the world.  But after I saw barley grow there, in a
climate which I knew was not proper for corn, and especially that I knew
not how it came there, it startled me strangely, and I began to suggest
that God had miraculously caused His grain to grow without any help of
seed sown, and that it was so directed purely for my sustenance on that
wild, miserable place.

This touched my heart a little, and brought tears out of my eyes, and I
began to bless myself that such a prodigy of nature should happen upon my
account; and this was the more strange to me, because I saw near it
still, all along by the side of the rock, some other straggling stalks,
which proved to be stalks of rice, and which I knew, because I had seen
it grow in Africa when I was ashore there.

I not only thought these the pure productions of Providence for my
support, but not doubting that there was more in the place, I went all
over that part of the island, where I had been before, peering in every
corner, and under every rock, to see for more of it, but I could not find
any.  At last it occurred to my thoughts that I shook a bag of chickens'
meat out in that place; and then the wonder began to cease; and I must
confess my religious thankfulness to God's providence began to abate,
too, upon the discovering that all this was nothing but what was common;
though I ought to have been as thankful for so strange and unforeseen a
providence as if it had been miraculous; for it was really the work of
Providence to me, that should order or appoint that ten or twelve grains
of corn should remain unspoiled, when the rats had destroyed all the
rest, as if it had been dropped from heaven; as also, that I should throw
it out in that particular place, where, it being in the shade of a high
rock, it sprang up immediately; whereas, if I had thrown it anywhere else
at that time, it had been burnt up and destroyed.

I carefully saved the ears of this corn, you may be sure, in their
season, which was about the end of June; and, laying up every corn, I
resolved to sow them all again, hoping in time to have some quantity
sufficient to supply me with bread.  But it was not till the fourth year
that I could allow myself the least grain of this corn to eat, and even
then but sparingly, as I shall say afterwards, in its order; for I lost
all that I sowed the first season by not observing the proper time; for I
sowed it just before the dry season, so that it never came up at all, at
least not as it would have done; of which in its place.

Besides this barley, there were, as above, twenty or thirty stalks of
rice, which I preserved with the same care and for the same use, or to
the same purpose--to make me bread, or rather food; for I found ways to
cook it without baking, though I did that also after some time.

But to return to my Journal.

I worked excessive hard these three or four months to get my wall done;
and the 14th of April I closed it up, contriving to go into it, not by a
door but over the wall, by a ladder, that there might be no sign on the
outside of my habitation.

_April_ 16.--I finished the ladder; so I went up the ladder to the top,
and then pulled it up after me, and let it down in the inside.  This was
a complete enclosure to me; for within I had room enough, and nothing
could come at me from without, unless it could first mount my wall.

The very next day after this wall was finished I had almost had all my
labour overthrown at once, and myself killed.  The case was thus: As I
was busy in the inside, behind my tent, just at the entrance into my
cave, I was terribly frighted with a most dreadful, surprising thing
indeed; for all on a sudden I found the earth come crumbling down from
the roof of my cave, and from the edge of the hill over my head, and two
of the posts I had set up in the cave cracked in a frightful manner.  I
was heartily scared; but thought nothing of what was really the cause,
only thinking that the top of my cave was fallen in, as some of it had
done before: and for fear I should be buried in it I ran forward to my
ladder, and not thinking myself safe there neither, I got over my wall
for fear of the pieces of the hill, which I expected might roll down upon
me.  I had no sooner stepped do ground, than I plainly saw it was a
terrible earthquake, for the ground I stood on shook three times at about
eight minutes' distance, with three such shocks as would have overturned
the strongest building that could be supposed to have stood on the earth;
and a great piece of the top of a rock which stood about half a mile from
me next the sea fell down with such a terrible noise as I never heard in
all my life.  I perceived also the very sea was put into violent motion
by it; and I believe the shocks were stronger under the water than on the
island.

I was so much amazed with the thing itself, having never felt the like,
nor discoursed with any one that had, that I was like one dead or
stupefied; and the motion of the earth made my stomach sick, like one
that was tossed at sea; but the noise of the falling of the rock awakened
me, as it were, and rousing me from the stupefied condition I was in,
filled me with horror; and I thought of nothing then but the hill falling
upon my tent and all my household goods, and burying all at once; and
this sunk my very soul within me a second time.

After the third shock was over, and I felt no more for some time, I began
to take courage; and yet I had not heart enough to go over my wall again,
for fear of being buried alive, but sat still upon the ground greatly
cast down and disconsolate, not knowing what to do.  All this while I had
not the least serious religious thought; nothing but the common "Lord
have mercy upon me!" and when it was over that went away too.

While I sat thus, I found the air overcast and grow cloudy, as if it
would rain.  Soon after that the wind arose by little and little, so that
in less than half-an-hour it blew a most dreadful hurricane; the sea was
all on a sudden covered over with foam and froth; the shore was covered
with the breach of the water, the trees were torn up by the roots, and a
terrible storm it was.  This held about three hours, and then began to
abate; and in two hours more it was quite calm, and began to rain very
hard.  All this while I sat upon the ground very much terrified and
dejected; when on a sudden it came into my thoughts, that these winds and
rain being the consequences of the earthquake, the earthquake itself was
spent and over, and I might venture into my cave again.  With this
thought my spirits began to revive; and the rain also helping to persuade
me, I went in and sat down in my tent.  But the rain was so violent that
my tent was ready to be beaten down with it; and I was forced to go into
my cave, though very much afraid and uneasy, for fear it should fall on
my head.  This violent rain forced me to a new work--viz. to cut a hole
through my new fortification, like a sink, to let the water go out, which
would else have flooded my cave.  After I had been in my cave for some
time, and found still no more shocks of the earthquake follow, I began to
be more composed.  And now, to support my spirits, which indeed wanted it
very much, I went to my little store, and took a small sup of rum; which,
however, I did then and always very sparingly, knowing I could have no
more when that was gone.  It continued raining all that night and great
part of the next day, so that I could not stir abroad; but my mind being
more composed, I began to think of what I had best do; concluding that if
the island was subject to these earthquakes, there would be no living for
me in a cave, but I must consider of building a little hut in an open
place which I might surround with a wall, as I had done here, and so make
myself secure from wild beasts or men; for I concluded, if I stayed where
I was, I should certainly one time or other be buried alive.

With these thoughts, I resolved to remove my tent from the place where it
stood, which was just under the hanging precipice of the hill; and which,
if it should be shaken again, would certainly fall upon my tent; and I
spent the two next days, being the 19th and 20th of April, in contriving
where and how to remove my habitation.  The fear of being swallowed up
alive made me that I never slept in quiet; and yet the apprehension of
lying abroad without any fence was almost equal to it; but still, when I
looked about, and saw how everything was put in order, how pleasantly
concealed I was, and how safe from danger, it made me very loath to
remove.  In the meantime, it occurred to me that it would require a vast
deal of time for me to do this, and that I must be contented to venture
where I was, till I had formed a camp for myself, and had secured it so
as to remove to it.  So with this resolution I composed myself for a
time, and resolved that I would go to work with all speed to build me a
wall with piles and cables, &c., in a circle, as before, and set my tent
up in it when it was finished; but that I would venture to stay where I
was till it was finished, and fit to remove.  This was the 21st.

_April_ 22.--The next morning I begin to consider of means to put this
resolve into execution; but I was at a great loss about my tools.  I had
three large axes, and abundance of hatchets (for we carried the hatchets
for traffic with the Indians); but with much chopping and cutting knotty
hard wood, they were all full of notches, and dull; and though I had a
grindstone, I could not turn it and grind my tools too.  This cost me as
much thought as a statesman would have bestowed upon a grand point of
politics, or a judge upon the life and death of a man.  At length I
contrived a wheel with a string, to turn it with my foot, that I might
have both my hands at liberty.  _Note_.--I had never seen any such thing
in England, or at least, not to take notice how it was done, though since
I have observed, it is very common there; besides that, my grindstone was
very large and heavy.  This machine cost me a full week's work to bring
it to perfection.

_April_ 28, 29.--These two whole days I took up in grinding my tools, my
machine for turning my grindstone performing very well.

_April_ 30.--Having perceived my bread had been low a great while, now I
took a survey of it, and reduced myself to one biscuit cake a day, which
made my heart very heavy.

_May_ 1.--In the morning, looking towards the sea side, the tide being
low, I saw something lie on the shore bigger than ordinary, and it looked
like a cask; when I came to it, I found a small barrel, and two or three
pieces of the wreck of the ship, which were driven on shore by the late
hurricane; and looking towards the wreck itself, I thought it seemed to
lie higher out of the water than it used to do.  I examined the barrel
which was driven on shore, and soon found it was a barrel of gunpowder;
but it had taken water, and the powder was caked as hard as a stone;
however, I rolled it farther on shore for the present, and went on upon
the sands, as near as I could to the wreck of the ship, to look for more.




CHAPTER VI--ILL AND CONSCIENCE-STRICKEN


When I came down to the ship I found it strangely removed.  The
forecastle, which lay before buried in sand, was heaved up at least six
feet, and the stern, which was broke in pieces and parted from the rest
by the force of the sea, soon after I had left rummaging her, was tossed
as it were up, and cast on one side; and the sand was thrown so high on
that side next her stern, that whereas there was a great place of water
before, so that I could not come within a quarter of a mile of the wreck
without swimming I could now walk quite up to her when the tide was out.
I was surprised with this at first, but soon concluded it must be done by
the earthquake; and as by this violence the ship was more broke open than
formerly, so many things came daily on shore, which the sea had loosened,
and which the winds and water rolled by degrees to the land.

This wholly diverted my thoughts from the design of removing my
habitation, and I busied myself mightily, that day especially, in
searching whether I could make any way into the ship; but I found nothing
was to be expected of that kind, for all the inside of the ship was
choked up with sand.  However, as I had learned not to despair of
anything, I resolved to pull everything to pieces that I could of the
ship, concluding that everything I could get from her would be of some
use or other to me.

_May_ 3.--I began with my saw, and cut a piece of a beam through, which I
thought held some of the upper part or quarter-deck together, and when I
had cut it through, I cleared away the sand as well as I could from the
side which lay highest; but the tide coming in, I was obliged to give
over for that time.

_May_ 4.--I went a-fishing, but caught not one fish that I durst eat of,
till I was weary of my sport; when, just going to leave off, I caught a
young dolphin.  I had made me a long line of some rope-yarn, but I had no
hooks; yet I frequently caught fish enough, as much as I cared to eat;
all which I dried in the sun, and ate them dry.

_May_ 5.--Worked on the wreck; cut another beam asunder, and brought
three great fir planks off from the decks, which I tied together, and
made to float on shore when the tide of flood came on.

_May_ 6.--Worked on the wreck; got several iron bolts out of her and
other pieces of ironwork.  Worked very hard, and came home very much
tired, and had thoughts of giving it over.

_May_ 7.--Went to the wreck again, not with an intent to work, but found
the weight of the wreck had broke itself down, the beams being cut; that
several pieces of the ship seemed to lie loose, and the inside of the
hold lay so open that I could see into it; but it was almost full of
water and sand.

_May_ 8.--Went to the wreck, and carried an iron crow to wrench up the
deck, which lay now quite clear of the water or sand.  I wrenched open
two planks, and brought them on shore also with the tide.  I left the
iron crow in the wreck for next day.

_May_ 9.--Went to the wreck, and with the crow made way into the body of
the wreck, and felt several casks, and loosened them with the crow, but
could not break them up.  I felt also a roll of English lead, and could
stir it, but it was too heavy to remove.

_May_ 10-14.--Went every day to the wreck; and got a great many pieces of
timber, and boards, or plank, and two or three hundredweight of iron.

_May_ 15.--I carried two hatchets, to try if I could not cut a piece off
the roll of lead by placing the edge of one hatchet and driving it with
the other; but as it lay about a foot and a half in the water, I could
not make any blow to drive the hatchet.

_May_ 16.--It had blown hard in the night, and the wreck appeared more
broken by the force of the water; but I stayed so long in the woods, to
get pigeons for food, that the tide prevented my going to the wreck that
day.

_May_ 17.--I saw some pieces of the wreck blown on shore, at a great
distance, near two miles off me, but resolved to see what they were, and
found it was a piece of the head, but too heavy for me to bring away.

_May_ 24.--Every day, to this day, I worked on the wreck; and with hard
labour I loosened some things so much with the crow, that the first
flowing tide several casks floated out, and two of the seamen's chests;
but the wind blowing from the shore, nothing came to land that day but
pieces of timber, and a hogshead, which had some Brazil pork in it; but
the salt water and the sand had spoiled it.  I continued this work every
day to the 15th of June, except the time necessary to get food, which I
always appointed, during this part of my employment, to be when the tide
was up, that I might be ready when it was ebbed out; and by this time I
had got timber and plank and ironwork enough to have built a good boat,
if I had known how; and also I got, at several times and in several
pieces, near one hundredweight of the sheet lead.

_June_ 16.--Going down to the seaside, I found a large tortoise or
turtle.  This was the first I had seen, which, it seems, was only my
misfortune, not any defect of the place, or scarcity; for had I happened
to be on the other side of the island, I might have had hundreds of them
every day, as I found afterwards; but perhaps had paid dear enough for
them.

_June_ 17.--I spent in cooking the turtle.  I found in her three-score
eggs; and her flesh was to me, at that time, the most savoury and
pleasant that ever I tasted in my life, having had no flesh, but of goats
and fowls, since I landed in this horrid place.

_June_ 18.--Rained all day, and I stayed within.  I thought at this time
the rain felt cold, and I was something chilly; which I knew was not
usual in that latitude.

_June_ 19.--Very ill, and shivering, as if the weather had been cold.

_June_ 20.--No rest all night; violent pains in my head, and feverish.

_June_ 21.--Very ill; frighted almost to death with the apprehensions of
my sad condition--to be sick, and no help.  Prayed to God, for the first
time since the storm off Hull, but scarce knew what I said, or why, my
thoughts being all confused.

_June_ 22.--A little better; but under dreadful apprehensions of
sickness.

_June_ 23.--Very bad again; cold and shivering, and then a violent
headache.

_June_ 24.--Much better.

_June_ 25.--An ague very violent; the fit held me seven hours; cold fit
and hot, with faint sweats after it.

_June_ 26.--Better; and having no victuals to eat, took my gun, but found
myself very weak.  However, I killed a she-goat, and with much difficulty
got it home, and broiled some of it, and ate, I would fain have stewed
it, and made some broth, but had no pot.

_June_ 27.--The ague again so violent that I lay a-bed all day, and
neither ate nor drank.  I was ready to perish for thirst; but so weak, I
had not strength to stand up, or to get myself any water to drink.
Prayed to God again, but was light-headed; and when I was not, I was so
ignorant that I knew not what to say; only I lay and cried, "Lord, look
upon me!  Lord, pity me!  Lord, have mercy upon me!"  I suppose I did
nothing else for two or three hours; till, the fit wearing off, I fell
asleep, and did not wake till far in the night.  When I awoke, I found
myself much refreshed, but weak, and exceeding thirsty.  However, as I
had no water in my habitation, I was forced to lie till morning, and went
to sleep again.  In this second sleep I had this terrible dream: I
thought that I was sitting on the ground, on the outside of my wall,
where I sat when the storm blew after the earthquake, and that I saw a
man descend from a great black cloud, in a bright flame of fire, and
light upon the ground.  He was all over as bright as a flame, so that I
could but just bear to look towards him; his countenance was most
inexpressibly dreadful, impossible for words to describe.  When he
stepped upon the ground with his feet, I thought the earth trembled, just
as it had done before in the earthquake, and all the air looked, to my
apprehension, as if it had been filled with flashes of fire.  He was no
sooner landed upon the earth, but he moved forward towards me, with a
long spear or weapon in his hand, to kill me; and when he came to a
rising ground, at some distance, he spoke to me--or I heard a voice so
terrible that it is impossible to express the terror of it.  All that I
can say I understood was this: "Seeing all these things have not brought
thee to repentance, now thou shalt die;" at which words, I thought he
lifted up the spear that was in his hand to kill me.

No one that shall ever read this account will expect that I should be
able to describe the horrors of my soul at this terrible vision.  I mean,
that even while it was a dream, I even dreamed of those horrors.  Nor is
it any more possible to describe the impression that remained upon my
mind when I awaked, and found it was but a dream.

I had, alas! no divine knowledge.  What I had received by the good
instruction of my father was then worn out by an uninterrupted series,
for eight years, of seafaring wickedness, and a constant conversation
with none but such as were, like myself, wicked and profane to the last
degree.  I do not remember that I had, in all that time, one thought that
so much as tended either to looking upwards towards God, or inwards
towards a reflection upon my own ways; but a certain stupidity of soul,
without desire of good, or conscience of evil, had entirely overwhelmed
me; and I was all that the most hardened, unthinking, wicked creature
among our common sailors can be supposed to be; not having the least
sense, either of the fear of God in danger, or of thankfulness to God in
deliverance.

In the relating what is already past of my story, this will be the more
easily believed when I shall add, that through all the variety of
miseries that had to this day befallen me, I never had so much as one
thought of it being the hand of God, or that it was a just punishment for
my sin--my rebellious behaviour against my father--or my present sins,
which were great--or so much as a punishment for the general course of my
wicked life.  When I was on the desperate expedition on the desert shores
of Africa, I never had so much as one thought of what would become of me,
or one wish to God to direct me whither I should go, or to keep me from
the danger which apparently surrounded me, as well from voracious
creatures as cruel savages.  But I was merely thoughtless of a God or a
Providence, acted like a mere brute, from the principles of nature, and
by the dictates of common sense only, and, indeed, hardly that.  When I
was delivered and taken up at sea by the Portugal captain, well used, and
dealt justly and honourably with, as well as charitably, I had not the
least thankfulness in my thoughts.  When, again, I was shipwrecked,
ruined, and in danger of drowning on this island, I was as far from
remorse, or looking on it as a judgment.  I only said to myself often,
that I was an unfortunate dog, and born to be always miserable.

It is true, when I got on shore first here, and found all my ship's crew
drowned and myself spared, I was surprised with a kind of ecstasy, and
some transports of soul, which, had the grace of God assisted, might have
come up to true thankfulness; but it ended where it began, in a mere
common flight of joy, or, as I may say, being glad I was alive, without
the least reflection upon the distinguished goodness of the hand which
had preserved me, and had singled me out to be preserved when all the
rest were destroyed, or an inquiry why Providence had been thus merciful
unto me.  Even just the same common sort of joy which seamen generally
have, after they are got safe ashore from a shipwreck, which they drown
all in the next bowl of punch, and forget almost as soon as it is over;
and all the rest of my life was like it.  Even when I was afterwards, on
due consideration, made sensible of my condition, how I was cast on this
dreadful place, out of the reach of human kind, out of all hope of
relief, or prospect of redemption, as soon as I saw but a prospect of
living and that I should not starve and perish for hunger, all the sense
of my affliction wore off; and I began to be very easy, applied myself to
the works proper for my preservation and supply, and was far enough from
being afflicted at my condition, as a judgment from heaven, or as the
hand of God against me: these were thoughts which very seldom entered my
head.

The growing up of the corn, as is hinted in my Journal, had at first some
little influence upon me, and began to affect me with seriousness, as
long as I thought it had something miraculous in it; but as soon as ever
that part of the thought was removed, all the impression that was raised
from it wore off also, as I have noted already.  Even the earthquake,
though nothing could be more terrible in its nature, or more immediately
directing to the invisible Power which alone directs such things, yet no
sooner was the first fright over, but the impression it had made went off
also.  I had no more sense of God or His judgments--much less of the
present affliction of my circumstances being from His hand--than if I had
been in the most prosperous condition of life.  But now, when I began to
be sick, and a leisurely view of the miseries of death came to place
itself before me; when my spirits began to sink under the burden of a
strong distemper, and nature was exhausted with the violence of the
fever; conscience, that had slept so long, began to awake, and I began to
reproach myself with my past life, in which I had so evidently, by
uncommon wickedness, provoked the justice of God to lay me under uncommon
strokes, and to deal with me in so vindictive a manner.  These
reflections oppressed me for the second or third day of my distemper; and
in the violence, as well of the fever as of the dreadful reproaches of my
conscience, extorted some words from me like praying to God, though I
cannot say they were either a prayer attended with desires or with hopes:
it was rather the voice of mere fright and distress.  My thoughts were
confused, the convictions great upon my mind, and the horror of dying in
such a miserable condition raised vapours into my head with the mere
apprehensions; and in these hurries of my soul I knew not what my tongue
might express.  But it was rather exclamation, such as, "Lord, what a
miserable creature am I!  If I should be sick, I shall certainly die for
want of help; and what will become of me!"  Then the tears burst out of
my eyes, and I could say no more for a good while.  In this interval the
good advice of my father came to my mind, and presently his prediction,
which I mentioned at the beginning of this story--viz. that if I did take
this foolish step, God would not bless me, and I would have leisure
hereafter to reflect upon having neglected his counsel when there might
be none to assist in my recovery.  "Now," said I, aloud, "my dear
father's words are come to pass; God's justice has overtaken me, and I
have none to help or hear me.  I rejected the voice of Providence, which
had mercifully put me in a posture or station of life wherein I might
have been happy and easy; but I would neither see it myself nor learn to
know the blessing of it from my parents.  I left them to mourn over my
folly, and now I am left to mourn under the consequences of it.  I abused
their help and assistance, who would have lifted me in the world, and
would have made everything easy to me; and now I have difficulties to
struggle with, too great for even nature itself to support, and no
assistance, no help, no comfort, no advice."  Then I cried out, "Lord, be
my help, for I am in great distress."  This was the first prayer, if I
may call it so, that I had made for many years.

But to return to my Journal.

_June_ 28.--Having been somewhat refreshed with the sleep I had had, and
the fit being entirely off, I got up; and though the fright and terror of
my dream was very great, yet I considered that the fit of the ague would
return again the next day, and now was my time to get something to
refresh and support myself when I should be ill; and the first thing I
did, I filled a large square case-bottle with water, and set it upon my
table, in reach of my bed; and to take off the chill or aguish
disposition of the water, I put about a quarter of a pint of rum into it,
and mixed them together.  Then I got me a piece of the goat's flesh and
broiled it on the coals, but could eat very little.  I walked about, but
was very weak, and withal very sad and heavy-hearted under a sense of my
miserable condition, dreading, the return of my distemper the next day.
At night I made my supper of three of the turtle's eggs, which I roasted
in the ashes, and ate, as we call it, in the shell, and this was the
first bit of meat I had ever asked God's blessing to, that I could
remember, in my whole life.  After I had eaten I tried to walk, but found
myself so weak that I could hardly carry a gun, for I never went out
without that; so I went but a little way, and sat down upon the ground,
looking out upon the sea, which was just before me, and very calm and
smooth.  As I sat here some such thoughts as these occurred to me: What
is this earth and sea, of which I have seen so much?  Whence is it
produced?  And what am I, and all the other creatures wild and tame,
human and brutal?  Whence are we?  Sure we are all made by some secret
Power, who formed the earth and sea, the air and sky.  And who is that?
Then it followed most naturally, it is God that has made all.  Well, but
then it came on strangely, if God has made all these things, He guides
and governs them all, and all things that concern them; for the Power
that could make all things must certainly have power to guide and direct
them.  If so, nothing can happen in the great circuit of His works,
either without His knowledge or appointment.

And if nothing happens without His knowledge, He knows that I am here,
and am in this dreadful condition; and if nothing happens without His
appointment, He has appointed all this to befall me.  Nothing occurred to
my thought to contradict any of these conclusions, and therefore it
rested upon me with the greater force, that it must needs be that God had
appointed all this to befall me; that I was brought into this miserable
circumstance by His direction, He having the sole power, not of me only,
but of everything that happened in the world.  Immediately it followed:
Why has God done this to me?  What have I done to be thus used?  My
conscience presently checked me in that inquiry, as if I had blasphemed,
and methought it spoke to me like a voice: "Wretch! dost _thou_ ask what
thou hast done?  Look back upon a dreadful misspent life, and ask thyself
what thou hast _not_ done?  Ask, why is it that thou wert not long ago
destroyed?  Why wert thou not drowned in Yarmouth Roads; killed in the
fight when the ship was taken by the Sallee man-of-war; devoured by the
wild beasts on the coast of Africa; or drowned _here_, when all the crew
perished but thyself?  Dost _thou_ ask, what have I done?"  I was struck
dumb with these reflections, as one astonished, and had not a word to
say--no, not to answer to myself, but rose up pensive and sad, walked
back to my retreat, and went up over my wall, as if I had been going to
bed; but my thoughts were sadly disturbed, and I had no inclination to
sleep; so I sat down in my chair, and lighted my lamp, for it began to be
dark.  Now, as the apprehension of the return of my distemper terrified
me very much, it occurred to my thought that the Brazilians take no
physic but their tobacco for almost all distempers, and I had a piece of
a roll of tobacco in one of the chests, which was quite cured, and some
also that was green, and not quite cured.

I went, directed by Heaven no doubt; for in this chest I found a cure
both for soul and body.  I opened the chest, and found what I looked for,
the tobacco; and as the few books I had saved lay there too, I took out
one of the Bibles which I mentioned before, and which to this time I had
not found leisure or inclination to look into.  I say, I took it out, and
brought both that and the tobacco with me to the table.  What use to make
of the tobacco I knew not, in my distemper, or whether it was good for it
or no: but I tried several experiments with it, as if I was resolved it
should hit one way or other.  I first took a piece of leaf, and chewed it
in my mouth, which, indeed, at first almost stupefied my brain, the
tobacco being green and strong, and that I had not been much used to.
Then I took some and steeped it an hour or two in some rum, and resolved
to take a dose of it when I lay down; and lastly, I burnt some upon a pan
of coals, and held my nose close over the smoke of it as long as I could
bear it, as well for the heat as almost for suffocation.  In the interval
of this operation I took up the Bible and began to read; but my head was
too much disturbed with the tobacco to bear reading, at least at that
time; only, having opened the book casually, the first words that
occurred to me were these, "Call on Me in the day of trouble, and I will
deliver thee, and thou shalt glorify Me."  These words were very apt to
my case, and made some impression upon my thoughts at the time of reading
them, though not so much as they did afterwards; for, as for being
_delivered_, the word had no sound, as I may say, to me; the thing was so
remote, so impossible in my apprehension of things, that I began to say,
as the children of Israel did when they were promised flesh to eat, "Can
God spread a table in the wilderness?" so I began to say, "Can God
Himself deliver me from this place?"  And as it was not for many years
that any hopes appeared, this prevailed very often upon my thoughts; but,
however, the words made a great impression upon me, and I mused upon them
very often.  It grew now late, and the tobacco had, as I said, dozed my
head so much that I inclined to sleep; so I left my lamp burning in the
cave, lest I should want anything in the night, and went to bed.  But
before I lay down, I did what I never had done in all my life--I kneeled
down, and prayed to God to fulfil the promise to me, that if I called
upon Him in the day of trouble, He would deliver me.  After my broken and
imperfect prayer was over, I drank the rum in which I had steeped the
tobacco, which was so strong and rank of the tobacco that I could
scarcely get it down; immediately upon this I went to bed.  I found
presently it flew up into my head violently; but I fell into a sound
sleep, and waked no more till, by the sun, it must necessarily be near
three o'clock in the afternoon the next day--nay, to this hour I am
partly of opinion that I slept all the next day and night, and till
almost three the day after; for otherwise I know not how I should lose a
day out of my reckoning in the days of the week, as it appeared some
years after I had done; for if I had lost it by crossing and recrossing
the line, I should have lost more than one day; but certainly I lost a
day in my account, and never knew which way.  Be that, however, one way
or the other, when I awaked I found myself exceedingly refreshed, and my
spirits lively and cheerful; when I got up I was stronger than I was the
day before, and my stomach better, for I was hungry; and, in short, I had
no fit the next day, but continued much altered for the better.  This was
the 29th.

The 30th was my well day, of course, and I went abroad with my gun, but
did not care to travel too far.  I killed a sea-fowl or two, something
like a brandgoose, and brought them home, but was not very forward to eat
them; so I ate some more of the turtle's eggs, which were very good.
This evening I renewed the medicine, which I had supposed did me good the
day before--the tobacco steeped in rum; only I did not take so much as
before, nor did I chew any of the leaf, or hold my head over the smoke;
however, I was not so well the next day, which was the first of July, as
I hoped I should have been; for I had a little spice of the cold fit, but
it was not much.

_July_ 2.--I renewed the medicine all the three ways; and dosed myself
with it as at first, and doubled the quantity which I drank.

_July_ 3.--I missed the fit for good and all, though I did not recover my
full strength for some weeks after.  While I was thus gathering strength,
my thoughts ran exceedingly upon this Scripture, "I will deliver thee";
and the impossibility of my deliverance lay much upon my mind, in bar of
my ever expecting it; but as I was discouraging myself with such
thoughts, it occurred to my mind that I pored so much upon my deliverance
from the main affliction, that I disregarded the deliverance I had
received, and I was as it were made to ask myself such questions as
these--viz. Have I not been delivered, and wonderfully too, from
sickness--from the most distressed condition that could be, and that was
so frightful to me? and what notice had I taken of it?  Had I done my
part?  God had delivered me, but I had not glorified Him--that is to say,
I had not owned and been thankful for that as a deliverance; and how
could I expect greater deliverance?  This touched my heart very much; and
immediately I knelt down and gave God thanks aloud for my recovery from
my sickness.

_July_ 4.--In the morning I took the Bible; and beginning at the New
Testament, I began seriously to read it, and imposed upon myself to read
a while every morning and every night; not tying myself to the number of
chapters, but long as my thoughts should engage me.  It was not long
after I set seriously to this work till I found my heart more deeply and
sincerely affected with the wickedness of my past life.  The impression
of my dream revived; and the words, "All these things have not brought
thee to repentance," ran seriously through my thoughts.  I was earnestly
begging of God to give me repentance, when it happened providentially,
the very day, that, reading the Scripture, I came to these words: "He is
exalted a Prince and a Saviour, to give repentance and to give
remission."  I threw down the book; and with my heart as well as my hands
lifted up to heaven, in a kind of ecstasy of joy, I cried out aloud,
"Jesus, thou son of David!  Jesus, thou exalted Prince and Saviour! give
me repentance!"  This was the first time I could say, in the true sense
of the words, that I prayed in all my life; for now I prayed with a sense
of my condition, and a true Scripture view of hope, founded on the
encouragement of the Word of God; and from this time, I may say, I began
to hope that God would hear me.

Now I began to construe the words mentioned above, "Call on Me, and I
will deliver thee," in a different sense from what I had ever done
before; for then I had no notion of anything being called _deliverance_,
but my being delivered from the captivity I was in; for though I was
indeed at large in the place, yet the island was certainly a prison to
me, and that in the worse sense in the world.  But now I learned to take
it in another sense: now I looked back upon my past life with such
horror, and my sins appeared so dreadful, that my soul sought nothing of
God but deliverance from the load of guilt that bore down all my comfort.
As for my solitary life, it was nothing.  I did not so much as pray to be
delivered from it or think of it; it was all of no consideration in
comparison to this.  And I add this part here, to hint to whoever shall
read it, that whenever they come to a true sense of things, they will
find deliverance from sin a much greater blessing than deliverance from
affliction.

But, leaving this part, I return to my Journal.

My condition began now to be, though not less miserable as to my way of
living, yet much easier to my mind: and my thoughts being directed, by a
constant reading the Scripture and praying to God, to things of a higher
nature, I had a great deal of comfort within, which till now I knew
nothing of; also, my health and strength returned, I bestirred myself to
furnish myself with everything that I wanted, and make my way of living
as regular as I could.

From the 4th of July to the 14th I was chiefly employed in walking about
with my gun in my hand, a little and a little at a time, as a man that
was gathering up his strength after a fit of sickness; for it is hardly
to be imagined how low I was, and to what weakness I was reduced.  The
application which I made use of was perfectly new, and perhaps which had
never cured an ague before; neither can I recommend it to any to
practise, by this experiment: and though it did carry off the fit, yet it
rather contributed to weakening me; for I had frequent convulsions in my
nerves and limbs for some time.  I learned from it also this, in
particular, that being abroad in the rainy season was the most pernicious
thing to my health that could be, especially in those rains which came
attended with storms and hurricanes of wind; for as the rain which came
in the dry season was almost always accompanied with such storms, so I
found that rain was much more dangerous than the rain which fell in
September and October.




CHAPTER VII--AGRICULTURAL EXPERIENCE


I had now been in this unhappy island above ten months.  All possibility
of deliverance from this condition seemed to be entirely taken from me;
and I firmly believe that no human shape had ever set foot upon that
place.  Having now secured my habitation, as I thought, fully to my mind,
I had a great desire to make a more perfect discovery of the island, and
to see what other productions I might find, which I yet knew nothing of.

It was on the 15th of July that I began to take a more particular survey
of the island itself.  I went up the creek first, where, as I hinted, I
brought my rafts on shore.  I found after I came about two miles up, that
the tide did not flow any higher, and that it was no more than a little
brook of running water, very fresh and good; but this being the dry
season, there was hardly any water in some parts of it--at least not
enough to run in any stream, so as it could be perceived.  On the banks
of this brook I found many pleasant savannahs or meadows, plain, smooth,
and covered with grass; and on the rising parts of them, next to the
higher grounds, where the water, as might be supposed, never overflowed,
I found a great deal of tobacco, green, and growing to a great and very
strong stalk.  There were divers other plants, which I had no notion of
or understanding about, that might, perhaps, have virtues of their own,
which I could not find out.  I searched for the cassava root, which the
Indians, in all that climate, make their bread of, but I could find none.
I saw large plants of aloes, but did not understand them.  I saw several
sugar-canes, but wild, and, for want of cultivation, imperfect.  I
contented myself with these discoveries for this time, and came back,
musing with myself what course I might take to know the virtue and
goodness of any of the fruits or plants which I should discover, but
could bring it to no conclusion; for, in short, I had made so little
observation while I was in the Brazils, that I knew little of the plants
in the field; at least, very little that might serve to any purpose now
in my distress.

The next day, the sixteenth, I went up the same way again; and after
going something further than I had gone the day before, I found the brook
and the savannahs cease, and the country become more woody than before.
In this part I found different fruits, and particularly I found melons
upon the ground, in great abundance, and grapes upon the trees.  The
vines had spread, indeed, over the trees, and the clusters of grapes were
just now in their prime, very ripe and rich.  This was a surprising
discovery, and I was exceeding glad of them; but I was warned by my
experience to eat sparingly of them; remembering that when I was ashore
in Barbary, the eating of grapes killed several of our Englishmen, who
were slaves there, by throwing them into fluxes and fevers.  But I found
an excellent use for these grapes; and that was, to cure or dry them in
the sun, and keep them as dried grapes or raisins are kept, which I
thought would be, as indeed they were, wholesome and agreeable to eat
when no grapes could be had.

I spent all that evening there, and went not back to my habitation;
which, by the way, was the first night, as I might say, I had lain from
home.  In the night, I took my first contrivance, and got up in a tree,
where I slept well; and the next morning proceeded upon my discovery;
travelling nearly four miles, as I might judge by the length of the
valley, keeping still due north, with a ridge of hills on the south and
north side of me.  At the end of this march I came to an opening where
the country seemed to descend to the west; and a little spring of fresh
water, which issued out of the side of the hill by me, ran the other way,
that is, due east; and the country appeared so fresh, so green, so
flourishing, everything being in a constant verdure or flourish of spring
that it looked like a planted garden.  I descended a little on the side
of that delicious vale, surveying it with a secret kind of pleasure,
though mixed with my other afflicting thoughts, to think that this was
all my own; that I was king and lord of all this country indefensibly,
and had a right of possession; and if I could convey it, I might have it
in inheritance as completely as any lord of a manor in England.  I saw
here abundance of cocoa trees, orange, and lemon, and citron trees; but
all wild, and very few bearing any fruit, at least not then.  However,
the green limes that I gathered were not only pleasant to eat, but very
wholesome; and I mixed their juice afterwards with water, which made it
very wholesome, and very cool and refreshing.  I found now I had business
enough to gather and carry home; and I resolved to lay up a store as well
of grapes as limes and lemons, to furnish myself for the wet season,
which I knew was approaching.  In order to do this, I gathered a great
heap of grapes in one place, a lesser heap in another place, and a great
parcel of limes and lemons in another place; and taking a few of each
with me, I travelled homewards; resolving to come again, and bring a bag
or sack, or what I could make, to carry the rest home.  Accordingly,
having spent three days in this journey, I came home (so I must now call
my tent and my cave); but before I got thither the grapes were spoiled;
the richness of the fruit and the weight of the juice having broken them
and bruised them, they were good for little or nothing; as to the limes,
they were good, but I could bring but a few.

The next day, being the nineteenth, I went back, having made me two small
bags to bring home my harvest; but I was surprised, when coming to my
heap of grapes, which were so rich and fine when I gathered them, to find
them all spread about, trod to pieces, and dragged about, some here, some
there, and abundance eaten and devoured.  By this I concluded there were
some wild creatures thereabouts, which had done this; but what they were
I knew not.  However, as I found there was no laying them up on heaps,
and no carrying them away in a sack, but that one way they would be
destroyed, and the other way they would be crushed with their own weight,
I took another course; for I gathered a large quantity of the grapes, and
hung upon the out-branches of the trees, that they might cure and dry in
the sun; and as for the limes and lemons, I carried as many back as I
could well stand under.

When I came home from this journey, I contemplated with great pleasure
the fruitfulness of that valley, and the pleasantness of the situation;
the security from storms on that side of the water, and the wood: and
concluded that I had pitched upon a place to fix my abode which was by
far the worst part of the country.  Upon the whole, I began to consider
of removing my habitation, and looking out for a place equally safe as
where now I was situate, if possible, in that pleasant, fruitful part of
the island.

This thought ran long in my head, and I was exceeding fond of it for some
time, the pleasantness of the place tempting me; but when I came to a
nearer view of it, I considered that I was now by the seaside, where it
was at least possible that something might happen to my advantage, and,
by the same ill fate that brought me hither might bring some other
unhappy wretches to the same place; and though it was scarce probable
that any such thing should ever happen, yet to enclose myself among the
hills and woods in the centre of the island was to anticipate my bondage,
and to render such an affair not only improbable, but impossible; and
that therefore I ought not by any means to remove.  However, I was so
enamoured of this place, that I spent much of my time there for the whole
of the remaining part of the month of July; and though upon second
thoughts, I resolved not to remove, yet I built me a little kind of a
bower, and surrounded it at a distance with a strong fence, being a
double hedge, as high as I could reach, well staked and filled between
with brushwood; and here I lay very secure, sometimes two or three nights
together; always going over it with a ladder; so that I fancied now I had
my country house and my sea-coast house; and this work took me up to the
beginning of August.

I had but newly finished my fence, and began to enjoy my labour, when the
rains came on, and made me stick close to my first habitation; for though
I had made me a tent like the other, with a piece of a sail, and spread
it very well, yet I had not the shelter of a hill to keep me from storms,
nor a cave behind me to retreat into when the rains were extraordinary.

About the beginning of August, as I said, I had finished my bower, and
began to enjoy myself.  The 3rd of August, I found the grapes I had hung
up perfectly dried, and, indeed, were excellent good raisins of the sun;
so I began to take them down from the trees, and it was very happy that I
did so, for the rains which followed would have spoiled them, and I had
lost the best part of my winter food; for I had above two hundred large
bunches of them.  No sooner had I taken them all down, and carried the
most of them home to my cave, than it began to rain; and from hence,
which was the 14th of August, it rained, more or less, every day till the
middle of October; and sometimes so violently, that I could not stir out
of my cave for several days.

In this season I was much surprised with the increase of my family; I had
been concerned for the loss of one of my cats, who ran away from me, or,
as I thought, had been dead, and I heard no more tidings of her till, to
my astonishment, she came home about the end of August with three
kittens.  This was the more strange to me because, though I had killed a
wild cat, as I called it, with my gun, yet I thought it was quite a
different kind from our European cats; but the young cats were the same
kind of house-breed as the old one; and both my cats being females, I
thought it very strange.  But from these three cats I afterwards came to
be so pestered with cats that I was forced to kill them like vermin or
wild beasts, and to drive them from my house as much as possible.

From the 14th of August to the 26th, incessant rain, so that I could not
stir, and was now very careful not to be much wet.  In this confinement,
I began to be straitened for food: but venturing out twice, I one day
killed a goat; and the last day, which was the 26th, found a very large
tortoise, which was a treat to me, and my food was regulated thus: I ate
a bunch of raisins for my breakfast; a piece of the goat's flesh, or of
the turtle, for my dinner, broiled--for, to my great misfortune, I had no
vessel to boil or stew anything; and two or three of the turtle's eggs
for my supper.

During this confinement in my cover by the rain, I worked daily two or
three hours at enlarging my cave, and by degrees worked it on towards one
side, till I came to the outside of the hill, and made a door or way out,
which came beyond my fence or wall; and so I came in and out this way.
But I was not perfectly easy at lying so open; for, as I had managed
myself before, I was in a perfect enclosure; whereas now I thought I lay
exposed, and open for anything to come in upon me; and yet I could not
perceive that there was any living thing to fear, the biggest creature
that I had yet seen upon the island being a goat.

_Sept._ 30.--I was now come to the unhappy anniversary of my landing.  I
cast up the notches on my post, and found I had been on shore three
hundred and sixty-five days.  I kept this day as a solemn fast, setting
it apart for religious exercise, prostrating myself on the ground with
the most serious humiliation, confessing my sins to God, acknowledging
His righteous judgments upon me, and praying to Him to have mercy on me
through Jesus Christ; and not having tasted the least refreshment for
twelve hours, even till the going down of the sun, I then ate a
biscuit-cake and a bunch of grapes, and went to bed, finishing the day as
I began it.  I had all this time observed no Sabbath day; for as at first
I had no sense of religion upon my mind, I had, after some time, omitted
to distinguish the weeks, by making a longer notch than ordinary for the
Sabbath day, and so did not really know what any of the days were; but
now, having cast up the days as above, I found I had been there a year;
so I divided it into weeks, and set apart every seventh day for a
Sabbath; though I found at the end of my account I had lost a day or two
in my reckoning.  A little after this, my ink began to fail me, and so I
contented myself to use it more sparingly, and to write down only the
most remarkable events of my life, without continuing a daily memorandum
of other things.

The rainy season and the dry season began now to appear regular to me,
and I learned to divide them so as to provide for them accordingly; but I
bought all my experience before I had it, and this I am going to relate
was one of the most discouraging experiments that I made.

I have mentioned that I had saved the few ears of barley and rice, which
I had so surprisingly found spring up, as I thought, of themselves, and I
believe there were about thirty stalks of rice, and about twenty of
barley; and now I thought it a proper time to sow it, after the rains,
the sun being in its southern position, going from me.  Accordingly, I
dug up a piece of ground as well as I could with my wooden spade, and
dividing it into two parts, I sowed my grain; but as I was sowing, it
casually occurred to my thoughts that I would not sow it all at first,
because I did not know when was the proper time for it, so I sowed about
two-thirds of the seed, leaving about a handful of each.  It was a great
comfort to me afterwards that I did so, for not one grain of what I sowed
this time came to anything: for the dry months following, the earth
having had no rain after the seed was sown, it had no moisture to assist
its growth, and never came up at all till the wet season had come again,
and then it grew as if it had been but newly sown.  Finding my first seed
did not grow, which I easily imagined was by the drought, I sought for a
moister piece of ground to make another trial in, and I dug up a piece of
ground near my new bower, and sowed the rest of my seed in February, a
little before the vernal equinox; and this having the rainy months of
March and April to water it, sprung up very pleasantly, and yielded a
very good crop; but having part of the seed left only, and not daring to
sow all that I had, I had but a small quantity at last, my whole crop not
amounting to above half a peck of each kind.  But by this experiment I
was made master of my business, and knew exactly when the proper season
was to sow, and that I might expect two seed-times and two harvests every
year.

While this corn was growing I made a little discovery, which was of use
to me afterwards.  As soon as the rains were over, and the weather began
to settle, which was about the month of November, I made a visit up the
country to my bower, where, though I had not been some months, yet I
found all things just as I left them.  The circle or double hedge that I
had made was not only firm and entire, but the stakes which I had cut out
of some trees that grew thereabouts were all shot out and grown with long
branches, as much as a willow-tree usually shoots the first year after
lopping its head.  I could not tell what tree to call it that these
stakes were cut from.  I was surprised, and yet very well pleased, to see
the young trees grow; and I pruned them, and led them up to grow as much
alike as I could; and it is scarce credible how beautiful a figure they
grew into in three years; so that though the hedge made a circle of about
twenty-five yards in diameter, yet the trees, for such I might now call
them, soon covered it, and it was a complete shade, sufficient to lodge
under all the dry season.  This made me resolve to cut some more stakes,
and make me a hedge like this, in a semi-circle round my wall (I mean
that of my first dwelling), which I did; and placing the trees or stakes
in a double row, at about eight yards distance from my first fence, they
grew presently, and were at first a fine cover to my habitation, and
afterwards served for a defence also, as I shall observe in its order.

I found now that the seasons of the year might generally be divided, not
into summer and winter, as in Europe, but into the rainy seasons and the
dry seasons, which were generally thus:--The half of February, the whole
of March, and the half of April--rainy, the sun being then on or near the
equinox.

The half of April, the whole of May, June, and July, and the half of
August--dry, the sun being then to the north of the line.

The half of August, the whole of September, and the half of
October--rainy, the sun being then come back.

The half of October, the whole of November, December, and January, and
the half of February--dry, the sun being then to the south of the line.

The rainy seasons sometimes held longer or shorter as the winds happened
to blow, but this was the general observation I made.  After I had found
by experience the ill consequences of being abroad in the rain, I took
care to furnish myself with provisions beforehand, that I might not be
obliged to go out, and I sat within doors as much as possible during the
wet months.  This time I found much employment, and very suitable also to
the time, for I found great occasion for many things which I had no way
to furnish myself with but by hard labour and constant application;
particularly I tried many ways to make myself a basket, but all the twigs
I could get for the purpose proved so brittle that they would do nothing.
It proved of excellent advantage to me now, that when I was a boy, I used
to take great delight in standing at a basket-maker's, in the town where
my father lived, to see them make their wicker-ware; and being, as boys
usually are, very officious to help, and a great observer of the manner
in which they worked those things, and sometimes lending a hand, I had by
these means full knowledge of the methods of it, and I wanted nothing but
the materials, when it came into my mind that the twigs of that tree from
whence I cut my stakes that grew might possibly be as tough as the
sallows, willows, and osiers in England, and I resolved to try.
Accordingly, the next day I went to my country house, as I called it, and
cutting some of the smaller twigs, I found them to my purpose as much as
I could desire; whereupon I came the next time prepared with a hatchet to
cut down a quantity, which I soon found, for there was great plenty of
them.  These I set up to dry within my circle or hedge, and when they
were fit for use I carried them to my cave; and here, during the next
season, I employed myself in making, as well as I could, a great many
baskets, both to carry earth or to carry or lay up anything, as I had
occasion; and though I did not finish them very handsomely, yet I made
them sufficiently serviceable for my purpose; thus, afterwards, I took
care never to be without them; and as my wicker-ware decayed, I made
more, especially strong, deep baskets to place my corn in, instead of
sacks, when I should come to have any quantity of it.

Having mastered this difficulty, and employed a world of time about it, I
bestirred myself to see, if possible, how to supply two wants.  I had no
vessels to hold anything that was liquid, except two runlets, which were
almost full of rum, and some glass bottles--some of the common size, and
others which were case bottles, square, for the holding of water,
spirits, &c.  I had not so much as a pot to boil anything, except a great
kettle, which I saved out of the ship, and which was too big for such as
I desired it--viz. to make broth, and stew a bit of meat by itself.  The
second thing I fain would have had was a tobacco-pipe, but it was
impossible to me to make one; however, I found a contrivance for that,
too, at last.  I employed myself in planting my second rows of stakes or
piles, and in this wicker-working all the summer or dry season, when
another business took me up more time than it could be imagined I could
spare.




CHAPTER VIII--SURVEYS HIS POSITION


I mentioned before that I had a great mind to see the whole island, and
that I had travelled up the brook, and so on to where I built my bower,
and where I had an opening quite to the sea, on the other side of the
island.  I now resolved to travel quite across to the sea-shore on that
side; so, taking my gun, a hatchet, and my dog, and a larger quantity of
powder and shot than usual, with two biscuit-cakes and a great bunch of
raisins in my pouch for my store, I began my journey.  When I had passed
the vale where my bower stood, as above, I came within view of the sea to
the west, and it being a very clear day, I fairly descried land--whether
an island or a continent I could not tell; but it lay very high,
extending from the W. to the W.S.W. at a very great distance; by my guess
it could not be less than fifteen or twenty leagues off.

I could not tell what part of the world this might be, otherwise than
that I knew it must be part of America, and, as I concluded by all my
observations, must be near the Spanish dominions, and perhaps was all
inhabited by savages, where, if I had landed, I had been in a worse
condition than I was now; and therefore I acquiesced in the dispositions
of Providence, which I began now to own and to believe ordered everything
for the best; I say I quieted my mind with this, and left off afflicting
myself with fruitless wishes of being there.

Besides, after some thought upon this affair, I considered that if this
land was the Spanish coast, I should certainly, one time or other, see
some vessel pass or repass one way or other; but if not, then it was the
savage coast between the Spanish country and Brazils, where are found the
worst of savages; for they are cannibals or men-eaters, and fail not to
murder and devour all the human bodies that fall into their hands.

With these considerations, I walked very leisurely forward.  I found that
side of the island where I now was much pleasanter than mine--the open or
savannah fields sweet, adorned with flowers and grass, and full of very
fine woods.  I saw abundance of parrots, and fain I would have caught
one, if possible, to have kept it to be tame, and taught it to speak to
me.  I did, after some painstaking, catch a young parrot, for I knocked
it down with a stick, and having recovered it, I brought it home; but it
was some years before I could make him speak; however, at last I taught
him to call me by name very familiarly.  But the accident that followed,
though it be a trifle, will be very diverting in its place.

I was exceedingly diverted with this journey.  I found in the low grounds
hares (as I thought them to be) and foxes; but they differed greatly from
all the other kinds I had met with, nor could I satisfy myself to eat
them, though I killed several.  But I had no need to be venturous, for I
had no want of food, and of that which was very good too, especially
these three sorts, viz. goats, pigeons, and turtle, or tortoise, which
added to my grapes, Leadenhall market could not have furnished a table
better than I, in proportion to the company; and though my case was
deplorable enough, yet I had great cause for thankfulness that I was not
driven to any extremities for food, but had rather plenty, even to
dainties.

I never travelled in this journey above two miles outright in a day, or
thereabouts; but I took so many turns and re-turns to see what
discoveries I could make, that I came weary enough to the place where I
resolved to sit down all night; and then I either reposed myself in a
tree, or surrounded myself with a row of stakes set upright in the
ground, either from one tree to another, or so as no wild creature could
come at me without waking me.

As soon as I came to the sea-shore, I was surprised to see that I had
taken up my lot on the worst side of the island, for here, indeed, the
shore was covered with innumerable turtles, whereas on the other side I
had found but three in a year and a half.  Here was also an infinite
number of fowls of many kinds, some which I had seen, and some which I
had not seen before, and many of them very good meat, but such as I knew
not the names of, except those called penguins.

I could have shot as many as I pleased, but was very sparing of my powder
and shot, and therefore had more mind to kill a she-goat if I could,
which I could better feed on; and though there were many goats here, more
than on my side the island, yet it was with much more difficulty that I
could come near them, the country being flat and even, and they saw me
much sooner than when I was on the hills.

I confess this side of the country was much pleasanter than mine; but yet
I had not the least inclination to remove, for as I was fixed in my
habitation it became natural to me, and I seemed all the while I was here
to be as it were upon a journey, and from home.  However, I travelled
along the shore of the sea towards the east, I suppose about twelve
miles, and then setting up a great pole upon the shore for a mark, I
concluded I would go home again, and that the next journey I took should
be on the other side of the island east from my dwelling, and so round
till I came to my post again.

I took another way to come back than that I went, thinking I could easily
keep all the island so much in my view that I could not miss finding my
first dwelling by viewing the country; but I found myself mistaken, for
being come about two or three miles, I found myself descended into a very
large valley, but so surrounded with hills, and those hills covered with
wood, that I could not see which was my way by any direction but that of
the sun, nor even then, unless I knew very well the position of the sun
at that time of the day.  It happened, to my further misfortune, that the
weather proved hazy for three or four days while I was in the valley, and
not being able to see the sun, I wandered about very uncomfortably, and
at last was obliged to find the seaside, look for my post, and come back
the same way I went: and then, by easy journeys, I turned homeward, the
weather being exceeding hot, and my gun, ammunition, hatchet, and other
things very heavy.

In this journey my dog surprised a young kid, and seized upon it; and I,
running in to take hold of it, caught it, and saved it alive from the
dog.  I had a great mind to bring it home if I could, for I had often
been musing whether it might not be possible to get a kid or two, and so
raise a breed of tame goats, which might supply me when my powder and
shot should be all spent.  I made a collar for this little creature, and
with a string, which I made of some rope-yam, which I always carried
about me, I led him along, though with some difficulty, till I came to my
bower, and there I enclosed him and left him, for I was very impatient to
be at home, from whence I had been absent above a month.

I cannot express what a satisfaction it was to me to come into my old
hutch, and lie down in my hammock-bed.  This little wandering journey,
without settled place of abode, had been so unpleasant to me, that my own
house, as I called it to myself, was a perfect settlement to me compared
to that; and it rendered everything about me so comfortable, that I
resolved I would never go a great way from it again while it should be my
lot to stay on the island.

I reposed myself here a week, to rest and regale myself after my long
journey; during which most of the time was taken up in the weighty affair
of making a cage for my Poll, who began now to be a mere domestic, and to
be well acquainted with me.  Then I began to think of the poor kid which
I had penned in within my little circle, and resolved to go and fetch it
home, or give it some food; accordingly I went, and found it where I left
it, for indeed it could not get out, but was almost starved for want of
food.  I went and cut boughs of trees, and branches of such shrubs as I
could find, and threw it over, and having fed it, I tied it as I did
before, to lead it away; but it was so tame with being hungry, that I had
no need to have tied it, for it followed me like a dog: and as I
continually fed it, the creature became so loving, so gentle, and so
fond, that it became from that time one of my domestics also, and would
never leave me afterwards.

The rainy season of the autumnal equinox was now come, and I kept the
30th of September in the same solemn manner as before, being the
anniversary of my landing on the island, having now been there two years,
and no more prospect of being delivered than the first day I came there,
I spent the whole day in humble and thankful acknowledgments of the many
wonderful mercies which my solitary condition was attended with, and
without which it might have been infinitely more miserable.  I gave
humble and hearty thanks that God had been pleased to discover to me that
it was possible I might be more happy in this solitary condition than I
should have been in the liberty of society, and in all the pleasures of
the world; that He could fully make up to me the deficiencies of my
solitary state, and the want of human society, by His presence and the
communications of His grace to my soul; supporting, comforting, and
encouraging me to depend upon His providence here, and hope for His
eternal presence hereafter.

It was now that I began sensibly to feel how much more happy this life I
now led was, with all its miserable circumstances, than the wicked,
cursed, abominable life I led all the past part of my days; and now I
changed both my sorrows and my joys; my very desires altered, my
affections changed their gusts, and my delights were perfectly new from
what they were at my first coming, or, indeed, for the two years past.

Before, as I walked about, either on my hunting or for viewing the
country, the anguish of my soul at my condition would break out upon me
on a sudden, and my very heart would die within me, to think of the
woods, the mountains, the deserts I was in, and how I was a prisoner,
locked up with the eternal bars and bolts of the ocean, in an uninhabited
wilderness, without redemption.  In the midst of the greatest composure
of my mind, this would break out upon me like a storm, and make me wring
my hands and weep like a child.  Sometimes it would take me in the middle
of my work, and I would immediately sit down and sigh, and look upon the
ground for an hour or two together; and this was still worse to me, for
if I could burst out into tears, or vent myself by words, it would go
off, and the grief, having exhausted itself, would abate.

But now I began to exercise myself with new thoughts: I daily read the
word of God, and applied all the comforts of it to my present state.  One
morning, being very sad, I opened the Bible upon these words, "I will
never, never leave thee, nor forsake thee."  Immediately it occurred that
these words were to me; why else should they be directed in such a
manner, just at the moment when I was mourning over my condition, as one
forsaken of God and man?  "Well, then," said I, "if God does not forsake
me, of what ill consequence can it be, or what matters it, though the
world should all forsake me, seeing on the other hand, if I had all the
world, and should lose the favour and blessing of God, there would be no
comparison in the loss?"

From this moment I began to conclude in my mind that it was possible for
me to be more happy in this forsaken, solitary condition than it was
probable I should ever have been in any other particular state in the
world; and with this thought I was going to give thanks to God for
bringing me to this place.  I know not what it was, but something shocked
my mind at that thought, and I durst not speak the words.  "How canst
thou become such a hypocrite," said I, even audibly, "to pretend to be
thankful for a condition which, however thou mayest endeavour to be
contented with, thou wouldst rather pray heartily to be delivered from?"
So I stopped there; but though I could not say I thanked God for being
there, yet I sincerely gave thanks to God for opening my eyes, by
whatever afflicting providences, to see the former condition of my life,
and to mourn for my wickedness, and repent.  I never opened the Bible, or
shut it, but my very soul within me blessed God for directing my friend
in England, without any order of mine, to pack it up among my goods, and
for assisting me afterwards to save it out of the wreck of the ship.

Thus, and in this disposition of mind, I began my third year; and though
I have not given the reader the trouble of so particular an account of my
works this year as the first, yet in general it may be observed that I
was very seldom idle, but having regularly divided my time according to
the several daily employments that were before me, such as: first, my
duty to God, and the reading the Scriptures, which I constantly set apart
some time for thrice every day; secondly, the going abroad with my gun
for food, which generally took me up three hours in every morning, when
it did not rain; thirdly, the ordering, cutting, preserving, and cooking
what I had killed or caught for my supply; these took up great part of
the day.  Also, it is to be considered, that in the middle of the day,
when the sun was in the zenith, the violence of the heat was too great to
stir out; so that about four hours in the evening was all the time I
could be supposed to work in, with this exception, that sometimes I
changed my hours of hunting and working, and went to work in the morning,
and abroad with my gun in the afternoon.

To this short time allowed for labour I desire may be added the exceeding
laboriousness of my work; the many hours which, for want of tools, want
of help, and want of skill, everything I did took up out of my time.  For
example, I was full two and forty days in making a board for a long
shelf, which I wanted in my cave; whereas, two sawyers, with their tools
and a saw-pit, would have cut six of them out of the same tree in half a
day.

My case was this: it was to be a large tree which was to be cut down,
because my board was to be a broad one.  This tree I was three days in
cutting down, and two more cutting off the boughs, and reducing it to a
log or piece of timber.  With inexpressible hacking and hewing I reduced
both the sides of it into chips till it began to be light enough to move;
then I turned it, and made one side of it smooth and flat as a board from
end to end; then, turning that side downward, cut the other side til I
brought the plank to be about three inches thick, and smooth on both
sides.  Any one may judge the labour of my hands in such a piece of work;
but labour and patience carried me through that, and many other things.
I only observe this in particular, to show the reason why so much of my
time went away with so little work--viz. that what might be a little to
be done with help and tools, was a vast labour and required a prodigious
time to do alone, and by hand.  But notwithstanding this, with patience
and labour I got through everything that my circumstances made necessary
to me to do, as will appear by what follows.

I was now, in the months of November and December, expecting my crop of
barley and rice.  The ground I had manured and dug up for them was not
great; for, as I observed, my seed of each was not above the quantity of
half a peck, for I had lost one whole crop by sowing in the dry season.
But now my crop promised very well, when on a sudden I found I was in
danger of losing it all again by enemies of several sorts, which it was
scarcely possible to keep from it; as, first, the goats, and wild
creatures which I called hares, who, tasting the sweetness of the blade,
lay in it night and day, as soon as it came up, and eat it so close, that
it could get no time to shoot up into stalk.

This I saw no remedy for but by making an enclosure about it with a
hedge; which I did with a great deal of toil, and the more, because it
required speed.  However, as my arable land was but small, suited to my
crop, I got it totally well fenced in about three weeks' time; and
shooting some of the creatures in the daytime, I set my dog to guard it
in the night, tying him up to a stake at the gate, where he would stand
and bark all night long; so in a little time the enemies forsook the
place, and the corn grew very strong and well, and began to ripen apace.

But as the beasts ruined me before, while my corn was in the blade, so
the birds were as likely to ruin me now, when it was in the ear; for,
going along by the place to see how it throve, I saw my little crop
surrounded with fowls, of I know not how many sorts, who stood, as it
were, watching till I should be gone.  I immediately let fly among them,
for I always had my gun with me.  I had no sooner shot, but there rose up
a little cloud of fowls, which I had not seen at all, from among the corn
itself.

This touched me sensibly, for I foresaw that in a few days they would
devour all my hopes; that I should be starved, and never be able to raise
a crop at all; and what to do I could not tell; however, I resolved not
to lose my corn, if possible, though I should watch it night and day.  In
the first place, I went among it to see what damage was already done, and
found they had spoiled a good deal of it; but that as it was yet too
green for them, the loss was not so great but that the remainder was
likely to be a good crop if it could be saved.

I stayed by it to load my gun, and then coming away, I could easily see
the thieves sitting upon all the trees about me, as if they only waited
till I was gone away, and the event proved it to be so; for as I walked
off, as if I was gone, I was no sooner out of their sight than they
dropped down one by one into the corn again.  I was so provoked, that I
could not have patience to stay till more came on, knowing that every
grain that they ate now was, as it might be said, a peck-loaf to me in
the consequence; but coming up to the hedge, I fired again, and killed
three of them.  This was what I wished for; so I took them up, and served
them as we serve notorious thieves in England--hanged them in chains, for
a terror to others.  It is impossible to imagine that this should have
such an effect as it had, for the fowls would not only not come at the
corn, but, in short, they forsook all that part of the island, and I
could never see a bird near the place as long as my scarecrows hung
there.  This I was very glad of, you may be sure, and about the latter
end of December, which was our second harvest of the year, I reaped my
corn.

I was sadly put to it for a scythe or sickle to cut it down, and all I
could do was to make one, as well as I could, out of one of the
broadswords, or cutlasses, which I saved among the arms out of the ship.
However, as my first crop was but small, I had no great difficulty to cut
it down; in short, I reaped it in my way, for I cut nothing off but the
ears, and carried it away in a great basket which I had made, and so
rubbed it out with my hands; and at the end of all my harvesting, I found
that out of my half-peck of seed I had near two bushels of rice, and
about two bushels and a half of barley; that is to say, by my guess, for
I had no measure at that time.

However, this was a great encouragement to me, and I foresaw that, in
time, it would please God to supply me with bread.  And yet here I was
perplexed again, for I neither knew how to grind or make meal of my corn,
or indeed how to clean it and part it; nor, if made into meal, how to
make bread of it; and if how to make it, yet I knew not how to bake it.
These things being added to my desire of having a good quantity for
store, and to secure a constant supply, I resolved not to taste any of
this crop but to preserve it all for seed against the next season; and in
the meantime to employ all my study and hours of working to accomplish
this great work of providing myself with corn and bread.

It might be truly said, that now I worked for my bread.  I believe few
people have thought much upon the strange multitude of little things
necessary in the providing, producing, curing, dressing, making, and
finishing this one article of bread.

I, that was reduced to a mere state of nature, found this to my daily
discouragement; and was made more sensible of it every hour, even after I
had got the first handful of seed-corn, which, as I have said, came up
unexpectedly, and indeed to a surprise.

First, I had no plough to turn up the earth--no spade or shovel to dig
it.  Well, this I conquered by making me a wooden spade, as I observed
before; but this did my work but in a wooden manner; and though it cost
me a great many days to make it, yet, for want of iron, it not only wore
out soon, but made my work the harder, and made it be performed much
worse.  However, this I bore with, and was content to work it out with
patience, and bear with the badness of the performance.  When the corn
was sown, I had no harrow, but was forced to go over it myself, and drag
a great heavy bough of a tree over it, to scratch it, as it may be
called, rather than rake or harrow it.  When it was growing, and grown, I
have observed already how many things I wanted to fence it, secure it,
mow or reap it, cure and carry it home, thrash, part it from the chaff,
and save it.  Then I wanted a mill to grind it sieves to dress it, yeast
and salt to make it into bread, and an oven to bake it; but all these
things I did without, as shall be observed; and yet the corn was an
inestimable comfort and advantage to me too.  All this, as I said, made
everything laborious and tedious to me; but that there was no help for.
Neither was my time so much loss to me, because, as I had divided it, a
certain part of it was every day appointed to these works; and as I had
resolved to use none of the corn for bread till I had a greater quantity
by me, I had the next six months to apply myself wholly, by labour and
invention, to furnish myself with utensils proper for the performing all
the operations necessary for making the corn, when I had it, fit for my
use.




CHAPTER IX--A BOAT


But first I was to prepare more land, for I had now seed enough to sow
above an acre of ground.  Before I did this, I had a week's work at least
to make me a spade, which, when it was done, was but a sorry one indeed,
and very heavy, and required double labour to work with it.  However, I
got through that, and sowed my seed in two large flat pieces of ground,
as near my house as I could find them to my mind, and fenced them in with
a good hedge, the stakes of which were all cut off that wood which I had
set before, and knew it would grow; so that, in a year's time, I knew I
should have a quick or living hedge, that would want but little repair.
This work did not take me up less than three months, because a great part
of that time was the wet season, when I could not go abroad.
Within-doors, that is when it rained and I could not go out, I found
employment in the following occupations--always observing, that all the
while I was at work I diverted myself with talking to my parrot, and
teaching him to speak; and I quickly taught him to know his own name, and
at last to speak it out pretty loud, "Poll," which was the first word I
ever heard spoken in the island by any mouth but my own.  This,
therefore, was not my work, but an assistance to my work; for now, as I
said, I had a great employment upon my hands, as follows: I had long
studied to make, by some means or other, some earthen vessels, which,
indeed, I wanted sorely, but knew not where to come at them.  However,
considering the heat of the climate, I did not doubt but if I could find
out any clay, I might make some pots that might, being dried in the sun,
be hard enough and strong enough to bear handling, and to hold anything
that was dry, and required to be kept so; and as this was necessary in
the preparing corn, meal, &c., which was the thing I was doing, I
resolved to make some as large as I could, and fit only to stand like
jars, to hold what should be put into them.

It would make the reader pity me, or rather laugh at me, to tell how many
awkward ways I took to raise this paste; what odd, misshapen, ugly things
I made; how many of them fell in and how many fell out, the clay not
being stiff enough to bear its own weight; how many cracked by the
over-violent heat of the sun, being set out too hastily; and how many
fell in pieces with only removing, as well before as after they were
dried; and, in a word, how, after having laboured hard to find the
clay--to dig it, to temper it, to bring it home, and work it--I could not
make above two large earthen ugly things (I cannot call them jars) in
about two months' labour.

However, as the sun baked these two very dry and hard, I lifted them very
gently up, and set them down again in two great wicker baskets, which I
had made on purpose for them, that they might not break; and as between
the pot and the basket there was a little room to spare, I stuffed it
full of the rice and barley straw; and these two pots being to stand
always dry I thought would hold my dry corn, and perhaps the meal, when
the corn was bruised.

Though I miscarried so much in my design for large pots, yet I made
several smaller things with better success; such as little round pots,
flat dishes, pitchers, and pipkins, and any things my hand turned to; and
the heat of the sun baked them quite hard.

But all this would not answer my end, which was to get an earthen pot to
hold what was liquid, and bear the fire, which none of these could do.
It happened after some time, making a pretty large fire for cooking my
meat, when I went to put it out after I had done with it, I found a
broken piece of one of my earthenware vessels in the fire, burnt as hard
as a stone, and red as a tile.  I was agreeably surprised to see it, and
said to myself, that certainly they might be made to burn whole, if they
would burn broken.

This set me to study how to order my fire, so as to make it burn some
pots.  I had no notion of a kiln, such as the potters burn in, or of
glazing them with lead, though I had some lead to do it with; but I
placed three large pipkins and two or three pots in a pile, one upon
another, and placed my firewood all round it, with a great heap of embers
under them.  I plied the fire with fresh fuel round the outside and upon
the top, till I saw the pots in the inside red-hot quite through, and
observed that they did not crack at all.  When I saw them clear red, I
let them stand in that heat about five or six hours, till I found one of
them, though it did not crack, did melt or run; for the sand which was
mixed with the clay melted by the violence of the heat, and would have
run into glass if I had gone on; so I slacked my fire gradually till the
pots began to abate of the red colour; and watching them all night, that
I might not let the fire abate too fast, in the morning I had three very
good (I will not say handsome) pipkins, and two other earthen pots, as
hard burnt as could be desired, and one of them perfectly glazed with the
running of the sand.

After this experiment, I need not say that I wanted no sort of
earthenware for my use; but I must needs say as to the shapes of them,
they were very indifferent, as any one may suppose, when I had no way of
making them but as the children make dirt pies, or as a woman would make
pies that never learned to raise paste.

No joy at a thing of so mean a nature was ever equal to mine, when I
found I had made an earthen pot that would bear the fire; and I had
hardly patience to stay till they were cold before I set one on the fire
again with some water in it to boil me some meat, which it did admirably
well; and with a piece of a kid I made some very good broth, though I
wanted oatmeal, and several other ingredients requisite to make it as
good as I would have had it been.

My next concern was to get me a stone mortar to stamp or beat some corn
in; for as to the mill, there was no thought of arriving at that
perfection of art with one pair of hands.  To supply this want, I was at
a great loss; for, of all the trades in the world, I was as perfectly
unqualified for a stone-cutter as for any whatever; neither had I any
tools to go about it with.  I spent many a day to find out a great stone
big enough to cut hollow, and make fit for a mortar, and could find none
at all, except what was in the solid rock, and which I had no way to dig
or cut out; nor indeed were the rocks in the island of hardness
sufficient, but were all of a sandy, crumbling stone, which neither would
bear the weight of a heavy pestle, nor would break the corn without
filling it with sand.  So, after a great deal of time lost in searching
for a stone, I gave it over, and resolved to look out for a great block
of hard wood, which I found, indeed, much easier; and getting one as big
as I had strength to stir, I rounded it, and formed it on the outside
with my axe and hatchet, and then with the help of fire and infinite
labour, made a hollow place in it, as the Indians in Brazil make their
canoes.  After this, I made a great heavy pestle or beater of the wood
called the iron-wood; and this I prepared and laid by against I had my
next crop of corn, which I proposed to myself to grind, or rather pound
into meal to make bread.

My next difficulty was to make a sieve or searce, to dress my meal, and
to part it from the bran and the husk; without which I did not see it
possible I could have any bread.  This was a most difficult thing even to
think on, for to be sure I had nothing like the necessary thing to make
it--I mean fine thin canvas or stuff to searce the meal through.  And
here I was at a full stop for many months; nor did I really know what to
do.  Linen I had none left but what was mere rags; I had goat's hair, but
neither knew how to weave it or spin it; and had I known how, here were
no tools to work it with.  All the remedy that I found for this was, that
at last I did remember I had, among the seamen's clothes which were saved
out of the ship, some neckcloths of calico or muslin; and with some
pieces of these I made three small sieves proper enough for the work; and
thus I made shift for some years: how I did afterwards, I shall show in
its place.

The baking part was the next thing to be considered, and how I should
make bread when I came to have corn; for first, I had no yeast.  As to
that part, there was no supplying the want, so I did not concern myself
much about it.  But for an oven I was indeed in great pain.  At length I
found out an experiment for that also, which was this: I made some
earthen-vessels very broad but not deep, that is to say, about two feet
diameter, and not above nine inches deep.  These I burned in the fire, as
I had done the other, and laid them by; and when I wanted to bake, I made
a great fire upon my hearth, which I had paved with some square tiles of
my own baking and burning also; but I should not call them square.

When the firewood was burned pretty much into embers or live coals, I
drew them forward upon this hearth, so as to cover it all over, and there
I let them lie till the hearth was very hot.  Then sweeping away all the
embers, I set down my loaf or loaves, and whelming down the earthen pot
upon them, drew the embers all round the outside of the pot, to keep in
and add to the heat; and thus as well as in the best oven in the world, I
baked my barley-loaves, and became in little time a good pastrycook into
the bargain; for I made myself several cakes and puddings of the rice;
but I made no pies, neither had I anything to put into them supposing I
had, except the flesh either of fowls or goats.

It need not be wondered at if all these things took me up most part of
the third year of my abode here; for it is to be observed that in the
intervals of these things I had my new harvest and husbandry to manage;
for I reaped my corn in its season, and carried it home as well as I
could, and laid it up in the ear, in my large baskets, till I had time to
rub it out, for I had no floor to thrash it on, or instrument to thrash
it with.

And now, indeed, my stock of corn increasing, I really wanted to build my
barns bigger; I wanted a place to lay it up in, for the increase of the
corn now yielded me so much, that I had of the barley about twenty
bushels, and of the rice as much or more; insomuch that now I resolved to
begin to use it freely; for my bread had been quite gone a great while;
also I resolved to see what quantity would be sufficient for me a whole
year, and to sow but once a year.

Upon the whole, I found that the forty bushels of barley and rice were
much more than I could consume in a year; so I resolved to sow just the
same quantity every year that I sowed the last, in hopes that such a
quantity would fully provide me with bread, &c.

All the while these things were doing, you may be sure my thoughts ran
many times upon the prospect of land which I had seen from the other side
of the island; and I was not without secret wishes that I were on shore
there, fancying that, seeing the mainland, and an inhabited country, I
might find some way or other to convey myself further, and perhaps at
last find some means of escape.

But all this while I made no allowance for the dangers of such an
undertaking, and how I might fall into the hands of savages, and perhaps
such as I might have reason to think far worse than the lions and tigers
of Africa: that if I once came in their power, I should run a hazard of
more than a thousand to one of being killed, and perhaps of being eaten;
for I had heard that the people of the Caribbean coast were cannibals or
man-eaters, and I knew by the latitude that I could not be far from that
shore.  Then, supposing they were not cannibals, yet they might kill me,
as many Europeans who had fallen into their hands had been served, even
when they had been ten or twenty together--much more I, that was but one,
and could make little or no defence; all these things, I say, which I
ought to have considered well; and did come into my thoughts afterwards,
yet gave me no apprehensions at first, and my head ran mightily upon the
thought of getting over to the shore.

Now I wished for my boy Xury, and the long-boat with shoulder-of-mutton
sail, with which I sailed above a thousand miles on the coast of Africa;
but this was in vain: then I thought I would go and look at our ship's
boat, which, as I have said, was blown up upon the shore a great way, in
the storm, when we were first cast away.  She lay almost where she did at
first, but not quite; and was turned, by the force of the waves and the
winds, almost bottom upward, against a high ridge of beachy, rough sand,
but no water about her.  If I had had hands to have refitted her, and to
have launched her into the water, the boat would have done well enough,
and I might have gone back into the Brazils with her easily enough; but I
might have foreseen that I could no more turn her and set her upright
upon her bottom than I could remove the island; however, I went to the
woods, and cut levers and rollers, and brought them to the boat resolving
to try what I could do; suggesting to myself that if I could but turn her
down, I might repair the damage she had received, and she would be a very
good boat, and I might go to sea in her very easily.

I spared no pains, indeed, in this piece of fruitless toil, and spent, I
think, three or four weeks about it; at last finding it impossible to
heave it up with my little strength, I fell to digging away the sand, to
undermine it, and so to make it fall down, setting pieces of wood to
thrust and guide it right in the fall.

But when I had done this, I was unable to stir it up again, or to get
under it, much less to move it forward towards the water; so I was forced
to give it over; and yet, though I gave over the hopes of the boat, my
desire to venture over for the main increased, rather than decreased, as
the means for it seemed impossible.

This at length put me upon thinking whether it was not possible to make
myself a canoe, or periagua, such as the natives of those climates make,
even without tools, or, as I might say, without hands, of the trunk of a
great tree.  This I not only thought possible, but easy, and pleased
myself extremely with the thoughts of making it, and with my having much
more convenience for it than any of the negroes or Indians; but not at
all considering the particular inconveniences which I lay under more than
the Indians did--viz. want of hands to move it, when it was made, into
the water--a difficulty much harder for me to surmount than all the
consequences of want of tools could be to them; for what was it to me, if
when I had chosen a vast tree in the woods, and with much trouble cut it
down, if I had been able with my tools to hew and dub the outside into
the proper shape of a boat, and burn or cut out the inside to make it
hollow, so as to make a boat of it--if, after all this, I must leave it
just there where I found it, and not be able to launch it into the water?

One would have thought I could not have had the least reflection upon my
mind of my circumstances while I was making this boat, but I should have
immediately thought how I should get it into the sea; but my thoughts
were so intent upon my voyage over the sea in it, that I never once
considered how I should get it off the land: and it was really, in its
own nature, more easy for me to guide it over forty-five miles of sea
than about forty-five fathoms of land, where it lay, to set it afloat in
the water.

I went to work upon this boat the most like a fool that ever man did who
had any of his senses awake.  I pleased myself with the design, without
determining whether I was ever able to undertake it; not but that the
difficulty of launching my boat came often into my head; but I put a stop
to my inquiries into it by this foolish answer which I gave myself--"Let
me first make it; I warrant I will find some way or other to get it along
when it is done."

This was a most preposterous method; but the eagerness of my fancy
prevailed, and to work I went.  I felled a cedar-tree, and I question
much whether Solomon ever had such a one for the building of the Temple
of Jerusalem; it was five feet ten inches diameter at the lower part next
the stump, and four feet eleven inches diameter at the end of twenty-two
feet; after which it lessened for a while, and then parted into branches.
It was not without infinite labour that I felled this tree; I was twenty
days hacking and hewing at it at the bottom; I was fourteen more getting
the branches and limbs and the vast spreading head cut off, which I
hacked and hewed through with axe and hatchet, and inexpressible labour;
after this, it cost me a month to shape it and dub it to a proportion,
and to something like the bottom of a boat, that it might swim upright as
it ought to do.  It cost me near three months more to clear the inside,
and work it out so as to make an exact boat of it; this I did, indeed,
without fire, by mere mallet and chisel, and by the dint of hard labour,
till I had brought it to be a very handsome periagua, and big enough to
have carried six-and-twenty men, and consequently big enough to have
carried me and all my cargo.

When I had gone through this work I was extremely delighted with it.  The
boat was really much bigger than ever I saw a canoe or periagua, that was
made of one tree, in my life.  Many a weary stroke it had cost, you may
be sure; and had I gotten it into the water, I make no question, but I
should have begun the maddest voyage, and the most unlikely to be
performed, that ever was undertaken.

But all my devices to get it into the water failed me; though they cost
me infinite labour too.  It lay about one hundred yards from the water,
and not more; but the first inconvenience was, it was up hill towards the
creek.  Well, to take away this discouragement, I resolved to dig into
the surface of the earth, and so make a declivity: this I began, and it
cost me a prodigious deal of pains (but who grudge pains who have their
deliverance in view?); but when this was worked through, and this
difficulty managed, it was still much the same, for I could no more stir
the canoe than I could the other boat.  Then I measured the distance of
ground, and resolved to cut a dock or canal, to bring the water up to the
canoe, seeing I could not bring the canoe down to the water.  Well, I
began this work; and when I began to enter upon it, and calculate how
deep it was to be dug, how broad, how the stuff was to be thrown out, I
found that, by the number of hands I had, being none but my own, it must
have been ten or twelve years before I could have gone through with it;
for the shore lay so high, that at the upper end it must have been at
least twenty feet deep; so at length, though with great reluctancy, I
gave this attempt over also.

This grieved me heartily; and now I saw, though too late, the folly of
beginning a work before we count the cost, and before we judge rightly of
our own strength to go through with it.

In the middle of this work I finished my fourth year in this place, and
kept my anniversary with the same devotion, and with as much comfort as
ever before; for, by a constant study and serious application to the Word
of God, and by the assistance of His grace, I gained a different
knowledge from what I had before.  I entertained different notions of
things.  I looked now upon the world as a thing remote, which I had
nothing to do with, no expectations from, and, indeed, no desires about:
in a word, I had nothing indeed to do with it, nor was ever likely to
have, so I thought it looked, as we may perhaps look upon it
hereafter--viz. as a place I had lived in, but was come out of it; and
well might I say, as Father Abraham to Dives, "Between me and thee is a
great gulf fixed."

In the first place, I was removed from all the wickedness of the world
here; I had neither the lusts of the flesh, the lusts of the eye, nor the
pride of life.  I had nothing to covet, for I had all that I was now
capable of enjoying; I was lord of the whole manor; or, if I pleased, I
might call myself king or emperor over the whole country which I had
possession of: there were no rivals; I had no competitor, none to dispute
sovereignty or command with me: I might have raised ship-loadings of
corn, but I had no use for it; so I let as little grow as I thought
enough for my occasion.  I had tortoise or turtle enough, but now and
then one was as much as I could put to any use: I had timber enough to
have built a fleet of ships; and I had grapes enough to have made wine,
or to have cured into raisins, to have loaded that fleet when it had been
built.

But all I could make use of was all that was valuable: I had enough to
eat and supply my wants, and what was all the rest to me?  If I killed
more flesh than I could eat, the dog must eat it, or vermin; if I sowed
more corn than I could eat, it must be spoiled; the trees that I cut down
were lying to rot on the ground; I could make no more use of them but for
fuel, and that I had no occasion for but to dress my food.

In a word, the nature and experience of things dictated to me, upon just
reflection, that all the good things of this world are no farther good to
us than they are for our use; and that, whatever we may heap up to give
others, we enjoy just as much as we can use, and no more.  The most
covetous, griping miser in the world would have been cured of the vice of
covetousness if he had been in my case; for I possessed infinitely more
than I knew what to do with.  I had no room for desire, except it was of
things which I had not, and they were but trifles, though, indeed, of
great use to me.  I had, as I hinted before, a parcel of money, as well
gold as silver, about thirty-six pounds sterling.  Alas! there the sorry,
useless stuff lay; I had no more manner of business for it; and often
thought with myself that I would have given a handful of it for a gross
of tobacco-pipes; or for a hand-mill to grind my corn; nay, I would have
given it all for a sixpenny-worth of turnip and carrot seed out of
England, or for a handful of peas and beans, and a bottle of ink.  As it
was, I had not the least advantage by it or benefit from it; but there it
lay in a drawer, and grew mouldy with the damp of the cave in the wet
seasons; and if I had had the drawer full of diamonds, it had been the
same case--they had been of no manner of value to me, because of no use.

I had now brought my state of life to be much easier in itself than it
was at first, and much easier to my mind, as well as to my body.  I
frequently sat down to meat with thankfulness, and admired the hand of
God's providence, which had thus spread my table in the wilderness.  I
learned to look more upon the bright side of my condition, and less upon
the dark side, and to consider what I enjoyed rather than what I wanted;
and this gave me sometimes such secret comforts, that I cannot express
them; and which I take notice of here, to put those discontented people
in mind of it, who cannot enjoy comfortably what God has given them,
because they see and covet something that He has not given them.  All our
discontents about what we want appeared to me to spring from the want of
thankfulness for what we have.

Another reflection was of great use to me, and doubtless would be so to
any one that should fall into such distress as mine was; and this was, to
compare my present condition with what I at first expected it would be;
nay, with what it would certainly have been, if the good providence of
God had not wonderfully ordered the ship to be cast up nearer to the
shore, where I not only could come at her, but could bring what I got out
of her to the shore, for my relief and comfort; without which, I had
wanted for tools to work, weapons for defence, and gunpowder and shot for
getting my food.

I spent whole hours, I may say whole days, in representing to myself, in
the most lively colours, how I must have acted if I had got nothing out
of the ship.  How I could not have so much as got any food, except fish
and turtles; and that, as it was long before I found any of them, I must
have perished first; that I should have lived, if I had not perished,
like a mere savage; that if I had killed a goat or a fowl, by any
contrivance, I had no way to flay or open it, or part the flesh from the
skin and the bowels, or to cut it up; but must gnaw it with my teeth, and
pull it with my claws, like a beast.

These reflections made me very sensible of the goodness of Providence to
me, and very thankful for my present condition, with all its hardships
and misfortunes; and this part also I cannot but recommend to the
reflection of those who are apt, in their misery, to say, "Is any
affliction like mine?"  Let them consider how much worse the cases of
some people are, and their case might have been, if Providence had
thought fit.

I had another reflection, which assisted me also to comfort my mind with
hopes; and this was comparing my present situation with what I had
deserved, and had therefore reason to expect from the hand of Providence.
I had lived a dreadful life, perfectly destitute of the knowledge and
fear of God.  I had been well instructed by father and mother; neither
had they been wanting to me in their early endeavours to infuse a
religious awe of God into my mind, a sense of my duty, and what the
nature and end of my being required of me.  But, alas! falling early into
the seafaring life, which of all lives is the most destitute of the fear
of God, though His terrors are always before them; I say, falling early
into the seafaring life, and into seafaring company, all that little
sense of religion which I had entertained was laughed out of me by my
messmates; by a hardened despising of dangers, and the views of death,
which grew habitual to me by my long absence from all manner of
opportunities to converse with anything but what was like myself, or to
hear anything that was good or tended towards it.

So void was I of everything that was good, or the least sense of what I
was, or was to be, that, in the greatest deliverances I enjoyed--such as
my escape from Sallee; my being taken up by the Portuguese master of the
ship; my being planted so well in the Brazils; my receiving the cargo
from England, and the like--I never had once the words "Thank God!" so
much as on my mind, or in my mouth; nor in the greatest distress had I so
much as a thought to pray to Him, or so much as to say, "Lord, have mercy
upon me!" no, nor to mention the name of God, unless it was to swear by,
and blaspheme it.

I had terrible reflections upon my mind for many months, as I have
already observed, on account of my wicked and hardened life past; and
when I looked about me, and considered what particular providences had
attended me since my coming into this place, and how God had dealt
bountifully with me--had not only punished me less than my iniquity had
deserved, but had so plentifully provided for me--this gave me great
hopes that my repentance was accepted, and that God had yet mercy in
store for me.

With these reflections I worked my mind up, not only to a resignation to
the will of God in the present disposition of my circumstances, but even
to a sincere thankfulness for my condition; and that I, who was yet a
living man, ought not to complain, seeing I had not the due punishment of
my sins; that I enjoyed so many mercies which I had no reason to have
expected in that place; that I ought never more to repine at my
condition, but to rejoice, and to give daily thanks for that daily bread,
which nothing but a crowd of wonders could have brought; that I ought to
consider I had been fed even by a miracle, even as great as that of
feeding Elijah by ravens, nay, by a long series of miracles; and that I
could hardly have named a place in the uninhabitable part of the world
where I could have been cast more to my advantage; a place where, as I
had no society, which was my affliction on one hand, so I found no
ravenous beasts, no furious wolves or tigers, to threaten my life; no
venomous creatures, or poisons, which I might feed on to my hurt; no
savages to murder and devour me.  In a word, as my life was a life of
sorrow one way, so it was a life of mercy another; and I wanted nothing
to make it a life of comfort but to be able to make my sense of God's
goodness to me, and care over me in this condition, be my daily
consolation; and after I did make a just improvement on these things, I
went away, and was no more sad.  I had now been here so long that many
things which I had brought on shore for my help were either quite gone,
or very much wasted and near spent.

My ink, as I observed, had been gone some time, all but a very little,
which I eked out with water, a little and a little, till it was so pale,
it scarce left any appearance of black upon the paper.  As long as it

After I had thus laid the scheme of my design, and in my imagination put
it in practice, I continually made my tour every morning to the top of
the hill, which was from my castle, as I called it, about three miles or
more, to see if I could observe any boats upon the sea, coming near the
island, or standing over towards it; but I began to tire of this hard
duty, after I had for two or three months constantly kept my watch, but
came always back without any discovery; there having not, in all that
time, been the least appearance, not only on or near the shore, but on
the whole ocean, so far as my eye or glass could reach every way.

As long as I kept my daily tour to the hill, to look out, so long also I
kept up the vigour of my design, and my spirits seemed to be all the
while in a suitable frame for so outrageous an execution as the killing
twenty or thirty naked savages, for an offence which I had not at all
entered into any discussion of in my thoughts, any farther than my
passions were at first fired by the horror I conceived at the unnatural
custom of the people of that country, who, it seems, had been suffered by
Providence, in His wise disposition of the world, to have no other guide
than that of their own abominable and vitiated passions; and consequently
were left, and perhaps had been so for some ages, to act such horrid
things, and receive such dreadful customs, as nothing but nature,
entirely abandoned by Heaven, and actuated by some hellish degeneracy,
could have run them into.  But now, when, as I have said, I began to be
weary of the fruitless excursion which I had made so long and so far
every morning in vain, so my opinion of the action itself began to alter;
and I began, with cooler and calmer thoughts, to consider what I was
going to engage in; what authority or call I had to pretend to be judge
and executioner upon these men as criminals, whom Heaven had thought fit
for so many ages to suffer unpunished to go on, and to be as it were the
executioners of His judgments one upon another; how far these people were
offenders against me, and what right I had to engage in the quarrel of
that blood which they shed promiscuously upon one another.  I debated
this very often with myself thus: "How do I know what God Himself judges
in this particular case?  It is certain these people do not commit this
as a crime; it is not against their own consciences reproving, or their
light reproaching them; they do not know it to be an offence, and then
commit it in defiance of divine justice, as we do in almost all the sins
we commit.  They think it no more a crime to kill a captive taken in war
than we do to kill an ox; or to eat human flesh than we do to eat
mutton."

When I considered this a little, it followed necessarily that I was
certainly in the wrong; that these people were not murderers, in the
sense that I had before condemned them in my thoughts, any more than
those Christians were murderers who often put to death the prisoners
taken in battle; or more frequently, upon many occasions, put whole
troops of men to the sword, without giving quarter, though they threw
down their arms and submitted.  In the next place, it occurred to me that
although the usage they gave one another was thus brutish and inhuman,
yet it was really nothing to me: these people had done me no injury: that
if they attempted, or I saw it necessary, for my immediate preservation,
to fall upon them, something might be said for it: but that I was yet out
of their power, and they really had no knowledge of me, and consequently
no design upon me; and therefore it could not be just for me to fall upon
them; that this would justify the conduct of the Spaniards in all their
barbarities practised in America, where they destroyed millions of these
people; who, however they were idolators and barbarians, and had several
bloody and barbarous rites in their customs, such as sacrificing human
bodies to their idols, were yet, as to the Spaniards, very innocent
people; and that the rooting them out of the country is spoken of with
the utmost abhorrence and detestation by even the Spaniards themselves at
this time, and by all other Christian nations of Europe, as a mere
butchery, a bloody and unnatural piece of cruelty, unjustifiable either
to God or man; and for which the very name of a Spaniard is reckoned to
be frightful and terrible, to all people of humanity or of Christian
compassion; as if the kingdom of Spain were particularly eminent for the
produce of a race of men who were without principles of tenderness, or
the common bowels of pity to the miserable, which is reckoned to be a
mark of generous temper in the mind.

These considerations really put me to a pause, and to a kind of a full
stop; and I began by little and little to be off my design, and to
conclude I had taken wrong measures in my resolution to attack the
savages; and that it was not my business to meddle with them, unless they
first attacked me; and this it was my business, if possible, to prevent:
but that, if I were discovered and attacked by them, I knew my duty.  On
the other hand, I argued with myself that this really was the way not to
deliver myself, but entirely to ruin and destroy myself; for unless I was
sure to kill every one that not only should be on shore at that time, but
that should ever come on shore afterwards, if but one of them escaped to
tell their country-people what had happened, they would come over again
by thousands to revenge the death of their fellows, and I should only
bring upon myself a certain destruction, which, at present, I had no
manner of occasion for.  Upon the whole, I concluded that I ought,
neither in principle nor in policy, one way or other, to concern myself
in this affair: that my business was, by all possible means to conceal
myself from them, and not to leave the least sign for them to guess by
that there were any living creatures upon the island--I mean of human
shape.  Religion joined in with this prudential resolution; and I was
convinced now, many ways, that I was perfectly out of my duty when I was
laying all my bloody schemes for the destruction of innocent creatures--I
mean innocent as to me.  As to the crimes they were guilty of towards one
another, I had nothing to do with them; they were national, and I ought
to leave them to the justice of God, who is the Governor of nations, and
knows how, by national punishments, to make a just retribution for
national offences, and to bring public judgments upon those who offend in
a public manner, by such ways as best please Him.  This appeared so clear
to me now, that nothing was a greater satisfaction to me than that I had
not been suffered to do a thing which I now saw so much reason to believe
would have been no less a sin than that of wilful murder if I had
committed it; and I gave most humble thanks on my knees to God, that He
had thus delivered me from blood-guiltiness; beseeching Him to grant me
the protection of His providence, that I might not fall into the hands of
the barbarians, or that I might not lay my hands upon them, unless I had
a more clear call from Heaven to do it, in defence of my own life.

In this disposition I continued for near a year after this; and so far
was I from desiring an occasion for falling upon these wretches, that in
all that time I never once went up the hill to see whether there were any
of them in sight, or to know whether any of them had been on shore there
or not, that I might not be tempted to renew any of my contrivances
against them, or be provoked by any advantage that might present itself
to fall upon them; only this I did: I went and removed my boat, which I
had on the other side of the island, and carried it down to the east end
of the whole island, where I ran it into a little cove, which I found
under some high rocks, and where I knew, by reason of the currents, the
savages durst not, at least would not, come with their boats upon any
account whatever.  With my boat I carried away everything that I had left
there belonging to her, though not necessary for the bare going
thither--viz. a mast and sail which I had made for her, and a thing like
an anchor, but which, indeed, could not be called either anchor or
grapnel; however, it was the best I could make of its kind: all these I
removed, that there might not be the least shadow for discovery, or
appearance of any boat, or of any human habitation upon the island.
Besides this, I kept myself, as I said, more retired than ever, and
seldom went from my cell except upon my constant employment, to milk my
she-goats, and manage my little flock in the wood, which, as it was quite
on the other part of the island, was out of danger; for certain, it is
that these savage people, who sometimes haunted this island, never came
with any thoughts of finding anything here, and consequently never
wandered off from the coast, and I doubt not but they might have been
several times on shore after my apprehensions of them had made me
cautious, as well as before.  Indeed, I looked back with some horror upon
the thoughts of what my condition would have been if I had chopped upon
them and been discovered before that; when, naked and unarmed, except
with one gun, and that loaded often only with small shot, I walked
everywhere, peeping and peering about the island, to see what I could
get; what a surprise should I have been in if, when I discovered the
print of a man's foot, I had, instead of that, seen fifteen or twenty
savages, and found them pursuing me, and by the swiftness of their
running no possibility of my escaping them!  The thoughts of this
sometimes sank my very soul within me, and distressed my mind so much
that I could not soon recover it, to think what I should have done, and
how I should not only have been unable to resist them, but even should
not have had presence of mind enough to do what I might have done; much
less what now, after so much consideration and preparation, I might be
able to do.  Indeed, after serious thinking of these things, I would be
melancholy, and sometimes it would last a great while; but I resolved it
all at last into thankfulness to that Providence which had delivered me
from so many unseen dangers, and had kept me from those mischiefs which I
could have no way been the agent in delivering myself from, because I had
not the least notion of any such thing depending, or the least
supposition of its being possible.  This renewed a contemplation which
often had come into my thoughts in former times, when first I began to
see the merciful dispositions of Heaven, in the dangers we run through in
this life; how wonderfully we are delivered when we know nothing of it;
how, when we are in a quandary as we call it, a doubt or hesitation
whether to go this way or that way, a secret hint shall direct us this
way, when we intended to go that way: nay, when sense, our own
inclination, and perhaps business has called us to go the other way, yet
a strange impression upon the mind, from we know not what springs, and by
we know not what power, shall overrule us to go this way; and it shall
afterwards appear that had we gone that way, which we should have gone,
and even to our imagination ought to have gone, we should have been
ruined and lost.  Upon these and many like reflections I afterwards made
it a certain rule with me, that whenever I found those secret hints or
pressings of mind to doing or not doing anything that presented, or going
this way or that way, I never failed to obey the secret dictate; though I
knew no other reason for it than such a pressure or such a hint hung upon
my mind.  I could give many examples of the success of this conduct in
the course of my life, but more especially in the latter part of my
inhabiting this unhappy island; besides many occasions which it is very
likely I might have taken notice of, if I had seen with the same eyes
then that I see with now.  But it is never too late to be wise; and I
cannot but advise all considering men, whose lives are attended with such
extraordinary incidents as mine, or even though not so extraordinary, not
to slight such secret intimations of Providence, let them come from what
invisible intelligence they will.  That I shall not discuss, and perhaps
cannot account for; but certainly they are a proof of the converse of
spirits, and a secret communication between those embodied and those
unembodied, and such a proof as can never be withstood; of which I shall
have occasion to give some remarkable instances in the remainder of my
solitary residence in this dismal place.

I believe the reader of this will not think it strange if I confess that
these anxieties, these constant dangers I lived in, and the concern that
was now upon me, put an end to all invention, and to all the contrivances
that I had laid for my future accommodations and conveniences.  I had the
care of my safety more now upon my hands than that of my food.  I cared
not to drive a nail, or chop a stick of wood now, for fear the noise I
might make should be heard: much less would I fire a gun for the same
reason: and above all I was intolerably uneasy at making any fire, lest
the smoke, which is visible at a great distance in the day, should betray
me.  For this reason, I removed that part of my business which required
fire, such as burning of pots and pipes, &c., into my new apartment in
the woods; where, after I had been some time, I found, to my unspeakable
consolation, a mere natural cave in the earth, which went in a vast way,
and where, I daresay, no savage, had he been at the mouth of it, would be
so hardy as to venture in; nor, indeed, would any man else, but one who,
like me, wanted nothing so much as a safe retreat.

The mouth of this hollow was at the bottom of a great rock, where, by
mere accident (I would say, if I did not see abundant reason to ascribe
all such things now to Providence), I was cutting down some thick
branches of trees to make charcoal; and before I go on I must observe the
reason of my making this charcoal, which was this--I was afraid of making
a smoke about my habitation, as I said before; and yet I could not live
there without baking my bread, cooking my meat, &c.; so I contrived to
burn some wood here, as I had seen done in England, under turf, till it
became chark or dry coal: and then putting the fire out, I preserved the
coal to carry home, and perform the other services for which fire was
wanting, without danger of smoke.  But this is by-the-bye.  While I was
cutting down some wood here, I perceived that, behind a very thick branch
of low brushwood or underwood, there was a kind of hollow place: I was
curious to look in it; and getting with difficulty into the mouth of it,
I found it was pretty large, that is to say, sufficient for me to stand
upright in it, and perhaps another with me: but I must confess to you
that I made more haste out than I did in, when looking farther into the
place, and which was perfectly dark, I saw two broad shining eyes of some
creature, whether devil or man I knew not, which twinkled like two stars;
the dim light from the cave's mouth shining directly in, and making the
reflection.  However, after some pause I recovered myself, and began to
call myself a thousand fools, and to think that he that was afraid to see
the devil was not fit to live twenty years in an island all alone; and
that I might well think there was nothing in this cave that was more
frightful than myself.  Upon this, plucking up my courage, I took up a
firebrand, and in I rushed again, with the stick flaming in my hand: I
had not gone three steps in before I was almost as frightened as before;
for I heard a very loud sigh, like that of a man in some pain, and it was
followed by a broken noise, as of words half expressed, and then a deep
sigh again.  I stepped back, and was indeed struck with such a surprise
that it put me into a cold sweat, and if I had had a hat on my head, I
will not answer for it that my hair might not have lifted it off.  But
still plucking up my spirits as well as I could, and encouraging myself a
little with considering that the power and presence of God was
everywhere, and was able to protect me, I stepped forward again, and by
the light of the firebrand, holding it up a little over my head, I saw
lying on the ground a monstrous, frightful old he-goat, just making his
will, as we say, and gasping for life, and, dying, indeed, of mere old
age.  I stirred him a little to see if I could get him out, and he
essayed to get up, but was not able to raise himself; and I thought with
myself he might even lie there--for if he had frightened me, so he would
certainly fright any of the savages, if any of them should be so hardy as
to come in there while he had any life in him.

I was now recovered from my surprise, and began to look round me, when I
found the cave was but very small--that is to say, it might be about
twelve feet over, but in no manner of shape, neither round nor square, no
hands having ever been employed in making it but those of mere Nature.  I
observed also that there was a place at the farther side of it that went
in further, but was so low that it required me to creep upon my hands and
knees to go into it, and whither it went I knew not; so, having no
candle, I gave it over for that time, but resolved to go again the next
day provided with candles and a tinder-box, which I had made of the lock
of one of the muskets, with some wildfire in the pan.

Accordingly, the next day I came provided with six large candles of my
own making (for I made very good candles now of goat's tallow, but was
hard set for candle-wick, using sometimes rags or rope-yarn, and
sometimes the dried rind of a weed like nettles); and going into this low
place I was obliged to creep upon all-fours as I have said, almost ten
yards--which, by the way, I thought was a venture bold enough,
considering that I knew not how far it might go, nor what was beyond it.
good laugh; you all stay here,
me show you good laugh."  So down he sits, and gets off his boots in a
moment, and puts on a pair of pumps (as we call the flat shoes they wear,
and which he had in his pocket), gives my other servant his horse, and
with his gun away he flew, swift like the wind.

The bear was walking softly on, and offered to meddle with nobody, till
Friday coming pretty near, calls to him, as if the bear could understand
him.  "Hark ye, hark ye," says Friday, "me speakee with you."  We
followed at a distance, for now being down on the Gascony side of the
mountains, we were entered a vast forest, where the country was plain and
pretty open, though it had many trees in it scattered here and there.
Friday, who had, as we say, the heels of the bear, came up with him
quickly, and took up a great stone, and threw it at him, and hit him just
on the head, but did him no more harm than if he had thrown it against a
wall; but it answered Friday's end, for the rogue was so void of fear
that he did it purely to make the bear follow him, and show us some laugh
as he called it.  As soon as the bear felt the blow, and saw him, he
turns about and comes after him, taking very long strides, and shuffling
on at a strange rate, so as would have put a horse to a middling gallop;
away reins Friday, and takes his course as if he ran towards us for help;
so we all resolved to fire at once upon the bear, and deliver my man;
though I was angry at him for bringing the bear back upon us, when he was
going about his own business another way; and especially I was angry that
he had turned the bear upon us, and then ran away; and I called out, "You
dog! is this your making us laugh?  Come away, and take your horse, that
we may shoot the creature."  He heard me, and cried out, "No shoot, no
shoot; stand still, and you get much laugh:" and as the nimble creature
ran two feet for the bear's one, he turned on a sudden on one side of us,
and seeing a great oak-tree fit for his purpose, he beckoned to us to
follow; and doubling his pace, he got nimbly up the tree, laying his gun
down upon the ground, at about five or six yards from the bottom of the
tree.  The bear soon came to the tree, and we followed at a distance: the
first thing he did he stopped at the gun, smelt at it, but let it lie,
and up he scrambles into the tree, climbing like a cat, though so
monstrous heavy.  I was amazed at the folly, as I thought it, of my man,
and could not for my life see anything to laugh at, till seeing the bear
get up the tree, we all rode near to him.

When we came to the tree, there was Friday got out to the small end of a
large branch, and the bear got about half-way to him.  As soon as the
bear got out to that part where the limb of the tree was weaker, "Ha!"
says he to us, "now you see me teachee the bear dance:" so he began
jumping and shaking the bough, at which the bear began to totter, but
stood still, and began to look behind him, to see how he should get back;
then, indeed, we did laugh heartily.  But Friday had not done with him by
a great deal; when seeing him stand still, he called out to him again, as
if he had supposed the bear could speak English, "What, you come no
farther? pray you come farther;" so he left jumping and shaking the tree;
and the bear, just as if he understood what he said, did come a little
farther; then he began jumping again, and the bear stopped again.  We
thought now was a good time to knock him in the head, and called to
Friday to stand still and we should shoot the bear: but he cried out
earnestly, "Oh, pray!  Oh, pray! no shoot, me shoot by and then:" he
would have said by-and-by.  However, to shorten the story, Friday danced
so much, and the bear stood so ticklish, that we had laughing enough, but
still could not imagine what the fellow would do: for first we thought he
depended upon shaking the bear off; and we found the bear was too cunning
for that too; for he would not go out far enough to be thrown down, but
clung fast with his great broad claws and feet, so that we could not
imagine what would be the end of it, and what the jest would be at last.
But Friday put us out of doubt quickly: for seeing the bear cling fast to
the bough, and that he would not be persuaded to come any farther, "Well,
well," says Friday, "you no come farther, me go; you no come to me, me
come to you;" and upon this he went out to the smaller end, where it
would bend with his weight, and gently let himself down by it, sliding
down the bough till he came near enough to jump down on his feet, and
away he ran to his gun, took it up, and stood still.  "Well," said I to
him, "Friday, what will you do now?  Why don't you shoot him?"  "No
shoot," says Friday, "no yet; me shoot now, me no kill; me stay, give you
one more laugh:" and, indeed, so he did; for when the bear saw his enemy
gone, he came back from the bough, where he stood, but did it very
cautiously, looking behind him every step, and coming backward till he
got into the body of the tree, then, with the same hinder end foremost,
he came down the tree, grasping it with his claws, and moving one foot at
a time, very leisurely.  At this juncture, and just before he could set
his hind foot on the ground, Friday stepped up close to him, clapped the
muzzle of his piece into his ear, and shot him dead.  Then the rogue
turned about to see if we did not laugh; and when he saw we were pleased
by our looks, he began to laugh very loud.  "So we kill bear in my
country," says Friday.  "So you kill them?" says I; "why, you have no
guns."--"No," says he, "no gun, but shoot great much long arrow."  This
was a good diversion to us; but we were still in a wild place, and our
guide very much hurt, and what to do we hardly knew; the howling of
wolves ran much in my head; and, indeed, except the noise I once heard on
the shore of Africa, of which I have said something already, I never
heard anything that filled me with so much horror.

These things, and the approach of night, called us off, or else, as
Friday would have had us, we should certainly have taken the skin of this
monstrous creature off, which was worth saving; but we had near three
leagues to go, and our guide hastened us; so we left him, and went
forward on our journey.

The ground was still covered with snow, though not so deep and dangerous
as on the mountains; and the ravenous creatures, as we heard afterwards,
were come down into the forest and plain country, pressed by hunger, to
seek for food, and had done a great deal of mischief in the villages,
where they surprised the country people, killed a great many of their
sheep and horses, and some people too.

We had one dangerous place to pass, and our guide told us if there were
more wolves in the country we should find them there; and this was a
small plain, surrounded with woods on every side, and a long, narrow
defile, or lane, which we were to pass to get through the wood, and then
we should come to the village where we were to lodge.

It was within half-an-hour of sunset when we entered the wood, and a
little after sunset when we came into the plain: we met with nothing in
the first wood, except that in a little plain within the wood, which was
not above two furlongs over, we saw five great wolves cross the road,
full speed, one after another, as if they had been in chase of some
prey, and had it in view; they took no notice of us, and were gone out
of sight in a few moments.  Upon this, our guide, who, by the way, was
but a fainthearted fellow, bid us keep in a ready posture, for he
believed there were more wolves a-coming.  We kept our arms ready, and
our eyes about us; but we saw no more wolves till we came through that
wood, which was near half a league, and entered the plain.  As soon as
we came into the plain, we had occasion enough to look about us.  The
first object we met with was a dead horse; that is to say, a poor horse
which the wolves had killed, and at least a dozen of them at work, we
could not say eating him, but picking his bones rather; for they had
eaten up all the flesh before. We did not think fit to disturb them at
their feast, neither did they take much notice of us.  Friday would have
let fly at them, but I would not suffer him by any means; for I found we
were like to have more business upon our hands than we were aware of.
We had not gone half over the plain when we began to hear the wolves
howl in the wood on our left in a frightful manner, and presently after
we saw about a hundred coming on directly towards us, all in a body, and
most of them in a line, as regularly as an army drawn up by experienced
officers.  I scarce knew in what manner to receive them, but found to
draw ourselves in a close line was the only way; so we formed in a
moment; but that we might not have too much interval, I ordered that
only every other man should fire, and that the others, who had not
fired, should stand ready to give them a second volley immediately, if
they continued to advance upon us; and then that those that had fired at
first should not pretend to load their fusees again, but stand ready,
every one with a pistol, for we were all armed with a fusee and a pair
of pistols each man; so we were, by this method, able to fire six
volleys, half of us at a time; however, at present we had no necessity;
for upon firing the first volley, the enemy made a full stop, being
terrified as well with the noise as with the fire.  Four of them being
shot in the head, dropped; several others were wounded, and went
bleeding off, as we could see by the snow.  I found they stopped, but
did not immediately retreat; whereupon, remembering that I had been told
that the fiercest creatures were terrified at the voice of a man, I
caused all the company to halloo as loud as they could; and I found the
notion not altogether mistaken; for upon our shout they began to retire
and turn about.  I then ordered a second volley to be fired in their
rear, which put them to the gallop, and away they went to the woods.
This gave us leisure to charge our pieces again; and that we might lose
no time, we kept going; but we had but little more than loaded our
fusees, and put ourselves in readiness, when we heard a terrible noise
in the same wood on our left, only that it was farther onward, the same
way we were to go.

The night was coming on, and the light began to be dusky, which made it
worse on our side; but the noise increasing, we could easily perceive
that it was the howling and yelling of those hellish creatures; and on a
sudden we perceived three troops of wolves, one on our left, one behind
us, and one in our front, so that we seemed to be surrounded with them:
however, as they did not fall upon us, we kept our way forward, as fast
as we could make our horses go, which, the way being very rough, was
only a good hard trot.  In this manner, we came in view of the entrance
of a wood, through which we were to pass, at the farther side of the
plain; but we were greatly surprised, when coming nearer the lane or
pass, we saw a confused number of wolves standing just at the entrance.
On a sudden, at another opening of the wood, we heard the noise of a
gun, and looking that way, out rushed a horse, with a saddle and a
bridle on him, flying like the wind, and sixteen or seventeen wolves
after him, full speed: the horse had the advantage of them; but as we
supposed that he could not hold it at that rate, we doubted not but they
would get up with him at last: no question but they did.

But here we had a most horrible sight; for riding up to the entrance
where the horse came out, we found the carcasses of another horse and of
two men, devoured by the ravenous creatures; and one of the men was no
doubt the same whom we heard fire the gun, for there lay a gun just by
him fired off; but as to the man, his head and the upper part of his body
was eaten up.  This filled us with horror, and we knew not what course to
take; but the creatures resolved us soon, for they gathered about us
presently, in hopes of prey; and I verily believe there were three
hundred of them.  It happened, very much to our advantage, that at the
entrance into the wood, but a little way from it, there lay some large
timber-trees, which had been cut down the summer before, and I suppose
lay there for carriage.  I drew my little troop in among those trees, and
placing ourselves in a line behind one long tree, I advised them all to
alight, and keeping that tree before us for a breastwork, to stand in a
triangle, or three fronts, enclosing our horses in the centre.  We did
so, and it was well we did; for never was a more furious charge than the
creatures made upon us in this place.  They came on with a growling kind
of noise, and mounted the piece of timber, which, as I said, was our
breastwork, as if they were only rushing upon their prey; and this fury
of theirs, it seems, was principally occasioned by their seeing our
horses behind us.  I ordered our men to fire as before, every other man;
and they took their aim so sure that they killed several of the wolves at
the first volley; but there was a necessity to keep a continual firing,
for they came on like devils, those behind pushing on those before.

When we had fired a second volley of our fusees, we thought they stopped
a little, and I hoped they would have gone off, but it was but a moment,
for others came forward again; so we fired two volleys of our pistols;
and I believe in these four firings we had killed seventeen or eighteen
of them, and lamed twice as many, yet they came on again.  I was loth to
spend our shot too hastily; so I called my servant, not my man Friday,
for he was better employed, for, with the greatest dexterity imaginable,
he had charged my fusee and his own while we were engaged--but, as I
said, I called my other man, and giving him a horn of powder, I had him
lay a train all along the piece of timber, and let it be a large train.
He did so, and had but just time to get away, when the wolves came up to
it, and some got upon it, when I, snapping an unchanged pistol close to
the powder, set it on fire; those that were upon the timber were scorched
with it, and six or seven of them fell; or rather jumped in among us with
the force and fright of the fire; we despatched these in an instant, and
the rest were so frightened with the light, which the night--for it was
now very near dark--made more terrible that they drew back a little; upon
which I ordered our last pistols to be fired off in one volley, and after
that we gave a shout; upon this the wolves turned tail, and we sallied
immediately upon near twenty lame ones that we found struggling on the
ground, and fell to cutting them with our swords, which answered our
expectation, for the crying and howling they made was better understood
by their fellows; so that they all fled and left us.

We had, first and last, killed about threescore of them, and had it been
daylight we had killed many more.  The field of battle being thus
cleared, we made forward again, for we had still near a league to go.  We
heard the ravenous creatures howl and yell in the woods as we went
several times, and sometimes we fancied we saw some of them; but the snow
dazzling our eyes, we were not certain.  In about an hour more we came to
the town where we were to lodge, which we found in a terrible fright and
all in arms; for, it seems, the night before the wolves and some bears
had broken into the village, and put them in such terror that they were
obliged to keep guard night and day, but especially in the night, to
preserve their cattle, and indeed their people.

The next morning our guide was so ill, and his limbs swelled so much with
the rankling of his two wounds, that he could go no farther; so we were
obliged to take a new guide here, and go to Toulouse, where we found a
warm climate, a fruitful, pleasant country, and no snow, no wolves, nor
anything like them; but when we told our story at Toulouse, they told us
it was nothing but what was ordinary in the great forest at the foot of
the mountains, especially when the snow lay on the ground; but they
inquired much what kind of guide we had got who would venture to bring us
that way in such a severe season, and told us it was surprising we were
not all devoured.  When we told them how we placed ourselves and the
horses in the middle, they blamed us exceedingly, and told us it was
fifty to one but we had been all destroyed, for it was the sight of the
horses which made the wolves so furious, seeing their prey, and that at
other times they are really afraid of a gun; but being excessively
hungry, and raging on that account, the eagerness to come at the horses
had made them senseless of danger, and that if we had not by the
continual fire, and at last by the stratagem of the train of powder,
mastered them, it had been great odds but that we had been torn to
pieces; whereas, had we been content to have sat still on horseback, and
fired as horsemen, they would not have taken the horses so much for their
own, when men were on their backs, as otherwise; and withal, they told us
that at last, if we had stood altogether, and left our horses, they would
have been so eager to have devoured them, that we might have come off
safe, especially having our firearms in our hands, being so many in
number.  For my part, I was never so sensible of danger in my life; for,
seeing above three hundred devils come roaring and open-mouthed to devour
us, and having nothing to shelter us or retreat to, I gave myself over
for lost; and, as it was, I believe I shall never care to cross those
mountains again: I think I would much rather go a thousand leagues by
sea, though I was sure to meet with a storm once a-week.

I have nothing uncommon to take notice of in my passage through
France--nothing but what other travellers have given an account of with
much more advantage than I can.  I travelled from Toulouse to Paris, and
without any considerable stay came to Calais, and landed safe at Dover
the 14th of January, after having had a severe cold season to travel in.

I was now come to the centre of my travels, and had in a little time all
my new-discovered estate safe about me, the bills of exchange which I
brought with me having been currently paid.

My principal guide and privy-counsellor was my good ancient widow, who,
in gratitude for the money I had sent her, thought no pains too much nor
care too great to employ for me; and I trusted her so entirely that I was
perfectly easy as to the security of my effects; and, indeed, I was very
happy from the beginning, and now to the end, in the unspotted integrity
of this good gentlewoman.

And now, having resolved to dispose of my plantation in the Brazils, I
wrote to my old friend at Lisbon, who, having offered it to the two
merchants, the survivors of my trustees, who lived in the Brazils, they
accepted the offer, and remitted thirty-three thousand pieces of eight to
a correspondent of theirs at Lisbon to pay for it.

In return, I signed the instrument of sale in the form which they sent
from Lisbon, and sent it to my old man, who sent me the bills of exchange
for thirty-two thousand eight hundred pieces of eight for the estate,
reserving the payment of one hundred moidores a year to him (the old man)
during his life, and fifty moidores afterwards to his son for his life,
which I had promised them, and which the plantation was to make good as a
rent-charge.  And thus I have given the first part of a life of fortune
and adventure--a life of Providence's chequer-work, and of a variety
which the world will seldom be able to show the like of; beginning
foolishly, but closing much more happily than any part of it ever gave me
leave so much as to hope for.

Any one would think that in this state of complicated good fortune I was
past running any more hazards--and so, indeed, I had been, if other
circumstances had concurred; but I was inured to a wandering life, had no
family, nor many relations; nor, however rich, had I contracted fresh
acquaintance; and though I had sold my estate in the Brazils, yet I could
not keep that country out of my head, and had a great mind to be upon the
wing again; especially I could not resist the strong inclination I had to
see my island, and to know if the poor Spaniards were in being there.  My
true friend, the widow, earnestly dissuaded me from it, and so far
prevailed with me, that for almost seven years she prevented my running
abroad, during which time I took my two nephews, the children of one of
my brothers, into my care; the eldest, having something of his own, I
bred up as a gentleman, and gave him a settlement of some addition to his
estate after my decease.  The other I placed with the captain of a ship;
and after five years, finding him a sensible, bold, enterprising young
fellow, I put him into a good ship, and sent him to sea; and this young
fellow afterwards drew me in, as old as I was, to further adventures
myself.

In the meantime, I in part settled myself here; for, first of all, I
married, and that not either to my disadvantage or dissatisfaction, and
had three children, two sons and one daughter; but my wife dying, and my
nephew coming home with good success from a voyage to Spain, my
inclination to go abroad, and his importunity, prevailed, and engaged me
to go in his ship as a private trader to the East Indies; this was in the
year 1694.

In this voyage I visited my new colony in the island, saw my successors
the Spaniards, had the old story of their lives and of the villains I
left there; how at first they insulted the poor Spaniards, how they
afterwards agreed, disagreed, united, separated, and how at last the
Spaniards were obliged to use violence with them; how they were subjected
to the Spaniards, how honestly the Spaniards used them--a history, if it
were entered into, as full of variety and wonderful accidents as my own
part--particularly, also, as to their battles with the Caribbeans, who
landed several times upon the island, and as to the improvement they made
upon the island itself, and how five of them made an attempt upon the
mainland, and brought away eleven men and five women prisoners, by which,
at my coming, I found about twenty young children on the island.

Here I stayed about twenty days, left them supplies of all necessary
things, and particularly of arms, powder, shot, clothes, tools, and two
workmen, which I had brought from England with me, viz. a carpenter and a
smith.

Besides this, I shared the lands into parts with them, reserved to myself
the property of the whole, but gave them such parts respectively as they
agreed on; and having settled all things with them, and engaged them not
to leave the place, I left them there.

From thence I touched at the Brazils, from whence I sent a bark, which I
bought there, with more people to the island; and in it, besides other
supplies, I sent seven women, being such as I found proper for service,
or for wives to such as would take them.  As to the Englishmen, I
promised to send them some women from England, with a good cargo of
necessaries, if they would apply themselves to planting--which I
afterwards could not perform.  The fellows proved very honest and
diligent after they were mastered and had their properties set apart for
them.  I sent them, also, from the Brazils, five cows, three of them
being big with calf, some sheep, and some hogs, which when I came again
were considerably increased.

But all these things, with an account how three hundred Caribbees came
and invaded them, and ruined their plantations, and how they fought with
that whole number twice, and were at first defeated, and one of them
killed; but at last, a storm destroying their enemies' canoes, they
famished or destroyed almost all the rest, and renewed and recovered the
possession of their plantation, and still lived upon the island.

All these things, with some very surprising incidents in some new
adventures of my own, for ten years more, I shall give a farther account
of in the Second Part of my Story.




***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LIFE AND ADVENTURES OF ROBINSON
CRUSOE***


******* This file should be named 521.txt or 521.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/5/2/521



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

